WELCOME TO THE
TUESDAY APRIL TWENTY SECOND
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE REGULAR
MEETING OF THE OF PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR DETAILED
INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES PLEASE REVIEW THE
FULL PRINTED MEETING AGENDA
PROVIDED MANAGER WILL YOU
PLEASE CALL THE ROLL CALL
COMMISSIONER HERE MR. RIGHT
HERE MR. HAMMERSCHMIDT HERE
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS HERE
COMMISSIONER IS HERE.
MR. MILLS HERE.
MR. WEATHERBY HERE.
MR. ADAMS MR. NORTON HERE.
GREAT THANK YOU.
I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
WEISS SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
MILLS.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE SAY
THAT HE OPPOSED THE NONE THE
MOTION PASSES THEY HAVE A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE MINUTES
OF APRIL FIFTEEN TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE MOVE BY MR. HAMMERSCHMIDT
AND SECONDED BY MR. WEATHERBY.
>> THANK YOU ALL.
ANY DISCUSSION OF THE MINUTES
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY I AND HE
OPPOSED THE MOTION CARRIES WITH
THAT WE'RE GOING TO GO RIGHT IN
PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
THREE MINUTES ON ISSUES NOT
LISTED AS A PUBLIC HEARING THIS
EVENING THE COMMISSION WILL
DISCUSS CHAPTER FOUR OF THE
DRAFT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN.
WE KINDLY ASK THAT YOU FOCUS
YOUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
COMMENTS ON THOSE SPECIFIC
SECTIONS IN THE FOLLOWING WEEKS
AS WE GET INTO GOALS,
STRATEGIES AND FUTURE LAND USE
MAP WE WILL DEDICATE ONE
SESSION TO EACH OF THOSE
REMAINING CHAPTERS ON THE
PUBLIC WILL HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE COMMENTS ON
THOSE CHAPTERS AS WELL.
SO WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK
REMOTELY PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE
LIVE ON THE PHONE OR USE A
RAISED HAND FISHER ZOOME FOR
PHONE ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND ENTER
MEETING NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX
SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS THE LAST THREE DIGITS
THE PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME ON
ZOOM AND YOU'LL HEAR THE
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN
IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK AND
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
BACKGROUND NOISE AND FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS PLEASE SPEAK YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS THE BEGINNING
OF THE COMMENTS IS THERE ANYONE
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
?
WELCOME.
THANK.
MY NAME IS MARY DURFEE.
TEN FIFTY TWO OLIVIA AS YOU
KNOW I'VE BEEN CONCERNED ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE AND HOW IT
AFFECTS THE ABILITY TO
ACCOMMODATE DENSIFICATION AND I
NOTICE IN CHAPTER FOUR IT'S
SPECIFIC TO STRATEGIES TWELVE
POINT ONE AND IT LISTS
COORDINATE IN A LINE
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT WITH
LAND USE AND GROWTH AND I
REALLY APPRECIATE THIS BEING
HERE BUT I WOULD LIKE TO SEE A
LITTLE MORE DETAIL AND I
REALIZE THAT THIS IS MORE OF AN
ASPIRATIONAL DOCUMENT.
I'VE BEEN LISTENING EVEN IF I'M
NOT HERE I LISTEN TO YOUR
ENTIRE MEETING ON ZOOME EVERY
SINGLE WEEK.
SO I HAVE BEEN LISTENING
CAREFULLY TO YOUR COMMENTS AND
SO I REALIZE THAT THIS IS
SOMEWHAT ASPIRATIONAL BUT I
ALSO REALIZE THAT THIS
ASPIRATIONAL DOCUMENT WILL WILL
LEAD THE WAY FOR ZONING CHANGES
AND HOW THAT ULTIMATELY GETS
OPERATIONALIZED.
AND I WOULD REALLY PLEAD WITH
YOU TO REALLY CONSIDER HOW OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE IS ABLE TO ADAPT
TO THE THE TYPE
OF DENSIFICATION THAT'S
PLANNED.
WE HAVE LOTS OF DENSIFICATION.
I WALKED DOWN DEWEY YESTERDAY.
I JUST BEEN WALKING VARIOUS
STREETS TO SEE WHAT APARTMENTS
LOOK LIKE WHEN THEY'RE
INTERMIXED WITH HOUSES AND
THERE'S LOTS OF THAT ON DEWEY.
BUT IT HAPPENED GRADUALLY OVER
TIME AND I WONDER HOW MUCH PENT
UP DEMAND THERE IS IN SOME
OF THESE NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE
THE WHERE THINGS COULD HAPPEN
VERY RAPIDLY.
SO I WOULD ASK YOU PLEASE TO
PHASE THIS GRADUALLY SO I DON'T
HAVE TO WEAR WATER IN MY
BASEMENT AGAIN THAT WE DON'T
HAVE STORM WATER PROBLEMS.
WE'VE HAD ENDLESS STORMWATER
PROBLEMS.
WE USED TO HAVE INDIVIDUALS WHO
LIVED IN VARIOUS HOUSES WHO
TOOK CARE OF CLEARING OUT THEIR
STORMWATER DRAINS EVERY TIME
THERE WAS PREDICTED TO BE A BIG
RAIN.
WELL, THOSE ARE NO RENTAL UNITS
AND NO ONE'S COMING OUT THERE
TO CLEAN THAT OUT.
I REALIZE THE CITY HAS LOTS
OF NEIGHBORHOODS THAT PROBABLY
HAVE MORE PROBLEMS THAN OURS.
BUT WHO'S GOING TO BE DOING
THAT IN THE FUTURE AND WHO'S
CLEANING OUT THOSE DRAINS AND
MAKING SURE THAT WE DON'T HAVE
WATER IN OUR BASEMENTS
PARTICULARLY AS YOU COVER MORE
OF THE LAND WITH NON-POROUS
SURFACES.
SO I WOULD PLEASE ASK YOU TO
CONSIDER THIS IN A VERY
INCREMENTAL AND THOUGHTFUL WAY
WHICH I KNOW YOU WILL DO.
>> THANKS SO MUCH.
THANK YOU.
IS RELIEF AND I WANT TO TALK
ABOUT JUST ONE SECTION IN
CHAPTER FOUR WHICH IS I THINK
CALLED FLEXIBILITY AND LAND USE
AND I THINK IT'D BE HELPFUL TO
DISTINGUISH TWO DIFFERENT KINDS
OF FLEXIBILITY.
ONE TYPE OF FLEXIBILITY COULD
BE FLEXIBILITY AND USE.
YOU COULD ALLOW FOR EXAMPLE IN
THE TRANSITION DISTRICT BOTH
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL
AND RESIDENTIAL TOGETHER.
AND I THINK THIS FLEXIBILITY IS
GREAT.
IT ALLOWS PEOPLE TO WALK FROM
THEIR HOMES TO NEARBY
BUSINESSES.
IT DOESN'T TRY TO ANTICIPATE
WHAT WILL BE THE DOMINANT LAND
USE TEN YEARS FROM NOW WHICH AS
YOU KNOW CAN BE VERY HARD.
SO I'M ALL FOR THAT AND I THINK
IT'S GREAT THAT THAT'S IN THE
PLAN.
THERE'S
ALSO A DIFFERENT TYPE
OF FLEXIBILITY WHICH WOULD BE
FLEXIBILITY IN USE IN STANDARD
AND THIS IS ONE THAT HASN'T
BEEN TALKED ABOUT VERY MUCH BUT
IT IS REFERENCED IN THE PLANT I
BELIEVE THAT SECTION SAYS THAT
IN THIS PROPOSED FLECK'S
DISTRICT THERE WOULD BE
FLEXIBILITY PRIORITIZED TO
MINIMIZE COMPLAINTS WITHIN THIS
DISTRICT AND I BELIEVE THE
INTENTION OF THIS DISTRICT IS
TO ATTRACT INDUSTRIAL
EMPLOYMENT USES ALONG WITH
CIRCULAR ECONOMY USES LIKE
RECYCLING CENTERS AND STORAGE
FOR THRIFT SHOPS AS WHAT IT
SAYS IN THE PLAN.
>> SO I THINK SOME OF THESE
CIRCULAR ECONOMY USES COULD BE
GREAT AND YOU CAN CONTAIN
RECYCLING CENTERS IN A
RESPONSIBLE WAY.
BUT IF YOU GOOGLE RUBI
RECYCLING SOME OF THESE OTHER
RECYCLING CENTERS IN WAYNE
COUNTY THAT OFTEN COULD ALSO BE
CALLED SCRAP METAL PLACES THEY
ARE OFTEN VERY NOXIOUS AND HAVE
ENVIRONMENTAL HARMS.
SO I THINK THAT TO SAY THAT
SOUTH INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH PARK
IN THESE AREAS NEED TO ATTRACT
MORE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT AND
WE SHOULD CONSIDER LOOSENING
OUR NUISANCE STANDARDS TO
ATTRACT THAT EMPLOYMENT IS NOT
NECESSARY OR WISE.
SO I SUGGEST FOCUSING ON THIS
FLEXIBILITY AND USE CONCEPT BUT
NOT IN HIS AND STANDARDS OR
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND WHAT
THAT MEANS IN PRACTICE I THINK
IS DROPPING THIS IDEA OF THE
FLECK'S DISTRICT AND INSTEAD
IT'S ONLY THOSE AREAS IN
TRANSITION AND I KNOW THIS BODY
ALREADY REJECTED A VERY SIMILAR
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT BUT IT'D BE
NICE REJECTED AGAIN AND BECAUSE
I THINK IT DOES ALLOW HOUSING
IN THEORY IN PRACTICE THE PLAN
CALLS FOR A SEPARATE DISTRICT
AND THE RATIONALE FOR THE
DISTRICT IS THAT HOUSING WILL
BE RESTRICTED IN IT AND I THINK
THAT'S A BIG MISSED OPPORTUNITY
BECAUSE THESE ARE THE AREAS
WHERE DEVELOPERS ARE LIKELY TO
GO WITH A LOT OF HOUSING AND IT
MIGHT BE MUCH LESS
CONTROVERSIAL THAN IN SOME
OTHER PARTS OF THE CITY.
SO THAT'S IT.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
THAT WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THIS TIME?
WELCOME.
HI MY NAME IS BEN MIRVAC FROM
15 FORTY SEVEN GRANGER I WAS
BORN AND RAISED IN ANN ARBOR
AND I'M AN INFREQUENT VISITOR
TO CITY HALL AND ACTUALLY FIRST
TIME SPEAKER AT ANYTHING LIKE
THIS BUT I THOUGHT THIS IS
IMPORTANT IMPORTANT ENOUGH TO
COME OUT FOR SO AS A NEW
HOMEOWNER I HAVE KIND OF TWO
POINTS I WANTED TO BRING UP ONE
KIND OF GENERAL COMMENT
ENGAGEMENT AND THEN A FEW
THINGS ABOUT RESIDENTIAL ZONING
INTRODUCED IN CHAPTER FOUR.
SO AS FAR AS ENGAGEMENT GOES, I
THINK I'M REASONABLY WELL
INFORMED BUT WITHOUT A
NEIGHBORS EMAIL I WOULD NEVER
HAVE KNOWN ANYTHING ABOUT THE
EXISTENCE OF THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN OR THIS PROCESS OF MAKING
IMPROVEMENTS TO IT.
THIS SUGGESTS TO ME THAT THERE
MAY NOT HAVE BEEN ENOUGH
ENGAGEMENT THUS FAR WITH THE
COMMUNITY.
IF YOU WANT TO ENGAGE WITH
PEOPLE MORE AND I THINK YOU
SHOULD CONSIDER MAKING AN
EFFORT TO MEET PEOPLE WHERE
THEY'RE AT RATHER THAN HAVING
THEM COME TO YOU.
THREE MEETINGS AT LIBRARIES IS
A GOOD START BUT I DON'T THINK
IT'S SUFFICIENT.
PEOPLE MAY BE UNAWARE ON
AVAILABLE OR UNABLE TO COME TO
YOU.
YOU COULD CONSIDER SPREADING
THE WORD THROUGH THINGS LIKE
SCHOOL NEWSLETTERS, HOLDING
MEETINGS AT SCHOOLS, BRIEF ONE
ON ONE INTERACTION AT CAFES,
PROVIDING THE PEOPLE WITH A
FLIER OR ENGAGING IN ONLINE
MANY EXISTING PLATFORMS OUT
THERE MORE SPECIFIC TO
RESIDENTIAL ZONING IN CHAPTER
FOUR.
I THINK THE ONE SIZE FITS ALL
PLAN WORKS POORLY FOR CLOTHINGS
.
WHY SHOULD IT WORK FOR CITY
PLANNING?
THERE'S LANGUAGE IN THE POLICY
THAT'S VAGUE AND AT TIMES
CONTRADICTORY.
SOME SPECIFIC EXAMPLES PAGE
FIFTY TWO WE SHOULD MAINTAIN
LOW RISE DEVELOPMENT.
THAT'S NOT A DRASTIC CHANGE THE
SCALE FROM WHAT EXISTS IN
NEIGHBORHOODS NOW BUT THEN WE
GO ON TO ADVOCATE HER FOUR
STORY APARTMENT BUILDINGS WHICH
IN MY OPINION IS THE DEFINITION
OF A DRASTIC CHANGE IN SCALE.
WE ALSO TALK ABOUT MEDIUM
DENSITY HOUSING LIKE DUPLEXES
TRIPLEX IS FITTING IN WELL IN
EXISTING NEIGHBORHOODS AND
PROVIDING A GENTLE AMOUNT
OF DENSITY.
BUT WHILE HARMONIZING SMALL TO
MEDIUM SCALE HOUSING UNITS
WOULD BE REASONABLE IN MY
OPINION UNDER A ONE SIZE FITS
ALL POLICY THERE'S LIMITED
CONTROL OVER WHAT GETS DESIGNED
OR BUILT IN A SPACE AND
DEVELOPERS COULD VERY EASILY
DEMOLISH A SINGLE FAMILY HOME
AND BUILD FOR STAAT FOUR STORY
CONCRETE CUBE ON EVERY
AVAILABLE INCH OF SPACE
DEVELOPMENTS LIKE THAT WOULD
DWARF NEARBY HOMES, BLOCK LIGHT
AND BACKYARD GARDENS OR ROOFTOP
SOLAR PANELS LIMIT CITIZENS
ABILITY TO QUIETLY ENJOY OUR
PROPERTY AND OVERALL NEGATIVELY
IMPACT OUR NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO I ENCOURAGE YOU NOT TO
COMPLETELY DISMANTLE THE
CURRENT SYSTEM BUT CONSIDER
KEEPING AT LEAST TWO
RESIDENTIAL ZONES THAT CATER TO
OUR CITY'S COMPLEX NEEDS AND
MORE PRECISELY DEFINED WHAT CAN
BE BUILT WHERE THEREBY
PREVENTING MASSIVE SHIFTS IN
SCALE AND THESE FOUR STOREY
APARTMENTS FROM DOMINATING OUR
BEAUTIFUL NEIGHBORHOODS.
THANKS.
THANK YOU
.
HI MY NAME IS MARISSA MCCONNELL
AND I'M A HOMEOWNER IN LOWER
BURNS PARK WHERE I LIVE WITH MY
HUSBAND AND MY ONE YEAR OLD.
I JUST WANTED TO BRIEFLY VOICE
MY SUPPORT FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
THIS IS ALSO MY FIRST TIME
ATTENDING ONE OF THESE MEETINGS
AND I LIKE MANY OTHER ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS, MY WORKING PARENT
THERE ARE MANY WORKING FAMILIES
IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD AND
THROUGHOUT THE CITY WHO SUPPORT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BUT
SIMPLY DON'T HAVE THE
FLEXIBILITY OR THE TIME TO
ATTEND THESE MEETINGS.
>> I JUST WANTED TO EMPHASIZE
AS WE ALL KNOW HERE WE ARE
FACING A HOUSING CRISIS HERE IN
ANN ARBOR.
YOUNG FAMILIES, STUDENTS AND
LONGTIME RESIDENTS ARE ALL
BEING PRICED OUT OF MY HOME.
I BOUGHT IT LIKE THREE YEARS
AGO AND IT'S ALREADY GONE UP
LIKE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS IN VALUE.
THAT'S JUST INSANE TO ME AND
YOU KNOW, THE FACT IS WE CANNOT
ADDRESS AFFORDABILITY WITHOUT
LOUSING ALLOWING MORE HOUSING
TO BE BUILT.
ANY SUGGESTION OTHERWISE IS
JUST NOT NOT DOES LINE UP WITH
THE FACTS HERE.
SO INCREMENTAL ZONING SUCH AS
THAT IS BEING SUGGESTED BY THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DOES NOT
MEAN THAT THERE WILL BE SUDDEN
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT.
IT MEANS THAT THERE'S JUST
GOING TO BE MORE FLEXIBILITY,
MORE OPTIONS AND A GRADUAL
CHANGE.
DENSER NEIGHBORHOODS CAN STILL
BE BEAUTIFUL, LIVABLE AND
ENVIRONMENTALLY RESPONSIBLE.
I JUST FEEL LIKE I NEED TO SAY
THAT BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT
OF MISINFORMATION BEING SHARED
ON A LISTSERV IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT I LIVE IN.
I'M TALKING ABOUT FEAR
MONGERING FOR LACK OF A BETTER
WORD AROUND WHAT WILL HAPPEN IF
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MOVES
FORWARD AND THESE CHANGES THAT
WE'RE WANTING TO MAKE ARE
IMPLEMENTED.
LASTLY, I JUST WANTED TO SAY
THAT THIS IS A GENERATIONAL
DECISION.
DOING NOTHING RIGHT NOW IS NOT
A NEUTRAL THING.
IT ONLY WORSENS A PROBLEM AND I
URGE THE COMMISSION TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH ZONING AND HELP
MAKE ANN ARBOR A PLACE FOR MORE
PEOPLE TO CALL HOME.
THANK THANK YOU
.
>> WELCOME MISS MARSHA.
PROGRAMS I LIVE ON SALES FIRST
STREET AS YOU KNOW SALES FOR
STREET ASHLEY HAVE HAD THE MIX
OF THE OLD HOUSES THAT THEN GOT
KNOCKED DOWN IN PLACES AND YOU
HAVE THESE AWFUL BRICK BUILDING
WELL THERE YOU KNOW CINDER
BLOCK INSTEAD BOUGHT ON PLEAING
FOR IS INTEGRITY OF THE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
NEIGHBORHOODS ARE REALLY
IMPORTANT.
SO THAT'S MY FIRST STATEMENT.
MY SECOND IS THE FOCUS SHOULD
BE ON THE DOWNTOWN ARROGANT
TOWN IS LAMENTABLE.
WHEN I MOVED HERE IN NINETEEN
EIGHTY SIX YOU COULD BUY
CLOTHING DOWNSTAIRS DOWNTOWN
YOU COULD BUY GO TO THE FIVE
AND DIME STORE.
THE CITY SERVICES WERE THERE
RIGHT NOW THEY'RE NOT SO THE
IDEA OF BRINGING MORE PEOPLE
INTO THE POOR DOESN'T SOLVE THE
BASIC PROBLEM OF RENTS THAT ARE
TOO HIGH FOR STORES ARE USED TO
BE PART OF AN ART GALLERY.
WE COULDN'T AFFORD THE RENT SO
WE DO SO I MEAN THE THINGS THAT
MADE ANN ARBOR QUIRKY AND
WONDERFUL ARE DISAPPEARING HAVE
DISAPPEARED AND I THINK THAT
THE INTEGRITY OF THE DOWNTOWN
NEEDS TO BE WORKED ON.
THERE ARE TOO MANY EMPTY
STOREFRONTS RIGHT NOW AND THE
QUESTION IS WHY?
AND WE'RE WE TALK ABOUT
BUILDING UP AND NOW NO GROUND
FLOOR WILL BE MORE STOREFRONTS.
WE CAN'T FILL THE STOREFRONTS
THAT ARE THERE BECAUSE THE
RENTS ARE TOO HIGH.
SO I THINK THERE ARE A LOT
OF CONCERNS THAT I HAVE.
I WANT IN ORDER TO BE A FUN
PLACE WITH ACTIVITIES THAT
WELCOME EVERYONE I THINK THAT
PUTTING FOUR STOREY BUILDINGS
NEXT TO TWO STOREY HOMES IS A
DISASTER FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD
THAT IS INVOLVED.
I HAVE BEEN TOLD THAT BECAUSE I
LIVE IN A HISTORIC DISTRICT
WE'RE PROTECTED BUT WHAT ABOUT
EVERYONE ELSE?
SO THAT'S COMING FROM THANK
YOU.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS DOWN ABOUT ONE EIGHT
NINE ZERO UPLINE DRIVE.
I'M ASKING THAT YOU PLEASE PASS
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN USE PLAN.
THIS IS A MUNICIPAL DOCUMENT
THAT'S BEING PAID FOR BY ANN
ARBOR TAXPAYERS AND YOU'VE
HIRED AN EXPERIENCED CONSULTANT
THAT'S PROVIDING A STRUCTURE A
VERY NICE GRAPHIC STRUCTURE
OF HIERARCHY OF DOMINANT
SUBDOMINANT AND SUBORDINATE THE
TEXT THOUGH SEEMS TO NOT BE
WITHOUT A SLANT
OR BIAS IS YOU
HAVE A CHANCE IF WE LOOK AT
INTERFACES PORTFOLIO WE CAN SEE
PLANS THAT HAVE BEEN DONE FOR
OTHER CITIES AND WE CAN SEE
THEM THEY'RE DELIVERING A FACT
BASED INFORMATION THAT WE CAN
CHECK ON AND WE'RE NOT SEEING
THAT IN AN OBVIOUS PLAN.
ALSO I'M NOT FOCUSING ON FOUR
BUT I'M MAKING COMMENTS THAT
ARE MORE GENERAL AND I HAD TO
BRING MY OWN GRAPHICS WITH ME
THIS I PRINTED OUT THE PLAN AND
WENT THROUGH IT AND I JUST WANT
TO SAY SO I'M AN ARTIST.
I COME FROM A FAMILY OF ARTISTS
.
I'M VERY IT'S A REALLY HERO.
THIS IS A SERIOUS DOCUMENT.
THIS DESERVES A SERIOUS COVER .
JUST A SIMPLE YOU HAVE IT THE
CITY VANOVER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
OF THE DATE AND THE CITY SEAL
THAT'S ALL IT NEEDS ANN ARBOR
FOR ALL IS THE MAYOR'S CAMPAIGN
SLOGAN.
IT HAS NO BUSINESS, IT'S
PROPAGANDA.
IT'S ON EVERY SINGLE PAGE
OF THE ONE HUNDRED NINE PAGES
OF THIS DOCUMENT THAT'S
PROPAGANDA AND AND MAYBE WORSE
IF NOT WORSE THAN THESE
CARTOONISH THINGS.
THIS IS CONDESCENDING AND
CHILDISH.
WE'RE MUCH BETTER EDUCATED CITY
.
WE DON'T NEED THAT.
SO IF THAT WAS ALL THOSE
CARTOONS COULD BE REMOVED.
IT'S JUST IT'S JUST CHILDISH
AND I'M NOT GOING TO GET INTO
THE CHAPTERS EXCEPT I WANT TO
SAY HERE YOUR COUNCIL
RESOLUTIONS THAT WILL BE FILLED
WHEN THE PLAN NEARS COMPLETION.
YOU'RE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
I HAVE A LITTLE BIT CONCERNED
ABOUT THESE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
YOU SAY COMMUNITY MEMBERS THANK
YOU TO ALL THE COMMUNITY
MEMBERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PROCESS YOUR
INPUT IDEAS, CONTINUED
ENGAGEMENT HAVE BEEN INVALUABLE
IN SHAPING A SHARED VISION FOR
THE FUTURE.
>> VANDIVER EXCEPT WE'RE ALL
AWARE THAT SEVERAL OF THESE
PEOPLE DON'T LIVE IN ANN ARBOR.
THEY'RE NOT HERE BY TAXPAYERS
SO IT'S NOT A SHARED VISION.
AND SO I BELIEVE THAT ANYONE
WHO TOOK PART IN THIS PROCESS
WHO WAS NOT A CITIZEN OR
TAXPAYER ANANOVA SHOULD HAVE AN
ASTERISK BY THEIR NAME AND
ANYONE WHO WILL EVENTUALLY
BENEFIT FROM ANY ZONING CHANGES
NEEDS A DOUBLE ASTERISK.
HEY, AND THEN I WANT TO TALK
ABOUT THIS, OK?
IF THIS IS A VISUAL DOCUMENT TO
WHO IN HEAVEN'S NAME PICKED
MAYBE THE MOST UNATTRACTIVE
PHOTO I'VE EVER SEEN OF ANN
ARBOR THIS LOOKS LIKE GOTHAM
SAFE.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
TOM STALBERG.
I LIVE AT ONE TWO ZERO TWO
TRAILER STREET RIGHT IN THE
HEART OF LOWERTOWN.
I'D LIKE TO TALK ABOUT
RECONCILING SOME OF THE VARIOUS
THINGS THAT HAVE BEEN SAID BUT
I WANT TO START WITH SOMETHING
THAT SPREAD THROUGHOUT THE PLAN
THE DRAFT PLAN INCLUDING
CHAPTER FOUR WHEN THE CITY
FIRST WAS DECIDING WHO TO PICK
FOR THEIR CONSULTANT, THEY
FORMED A COMMITTEE ONE PERSON
FROM EACH WARD WAS ON THAT
COMMITTEE PLUS A MAYOR'S PICK.
THOSE PEOPLE CHOSE TO HAVE A
SURVEY, A STATISTICALLY VALID
SURVEY.
THEY SAID THAT THEY WANTED THAT
THEY ASKED FOR THAT THE CITY
REFUSED TO DO THAT.
PLEASE REMOVE ALMOST ALL
OF WHAT YOU HAVE IN THE WE HAVE
HEARD SECTIONS BECAUSE THE
SURVEY THAT YOU'RE BASING THE
DATA IN THERE IS NOT A VALID
STATISTICALLY VALID SURVEY.
YOU'VE GOT A SMALL NUMBER
OF PEOPLE.
THE WAY THE COMMENTS WERE
BROUGHT IN IS NOT VALID TO PUT
THAT IN A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AS
DATA SOMETHING THAT MIGHT SAY
FIFTY NINE PERCENT 59 PERCENT
WANT NOT OF STATISTICALLY VALID
SURVEY CITY COUNCIL PASSED THE
RESOLUTION DATA THREE YOU
DECIDED AS A BODY NOT TO TAKE
THAT UP.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT THAT
RESOLUTION SAID WAS AT THIS
POINT IN TIME IN THE PROCESS
YOU CAN HAVE MORE DETAILS OR
LESS DETAILS SOMEHOW THIS IS
MORPHED INTO THE TALKING POINTS
IN THE ETHER.
ALL THE DETAILS COME LATER LAST
NIGHT COMMISSIONER COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH SAID WHEN TALKING
ABOUT SOME SPECIFIC ITEMS IN
THAT RESOLUTION, INCLUDING HALF
BLOCKS, FULL BLOCK STEP BACKS,
PERSONAL ASSEMBLAGES QUOTE NONE
OF THOSE WILL BE FIGURED OUT
UNTIL THE ZONING NO.
IT IS TOTALLY APPROPRIATE TO
HAVE SOME OF THE DETAILS OUT OR
LESS OF THE DETAILS.
NOW I'M IN THE CAMP THAT LOOKS
FOR A LOT MORE DETAILS HOW THE
ZONING CODE IS BASED ON THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
THEY ARE DIFFERENT DOCUMENTS
BUT THEY ARE INSEPARABLE.
THE ZONING CODE MUST BE BASED
ON THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IN
TERMS OF INCREASED
AFFORDABILITY.
COMMISSIONER AND COUNCIL MEMBER
JUST SIMPLY BY SUPPLY THE UNITS
WILL COME IN AT MARKET RATE AND
SLOW THE RATE OF RENTAL
INCREASE IF WE DEREGULATE AND
ALLOW THE MARKET TO DECIDE
WHERE THE UNITS ARE COMING
FROM, IT SEEMS PRETTY CLOSE TO
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE HIGH END
UNITS AND WE GOT A LITTLE BIT
IN THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND
WE REALLY ARE MISSING THE
MIDDLE.
WE MIGHT HAVE MISSING MIDDLE
HOUSING TYPES IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
WE WILL NOT HAVE A MISSING
MIDDLE PRICING SLOWING THE RATE
OF GROWTH MEANS AT TWENTY ONE
HUNDRED OUR STUDIO APARTMENT
MIGHT BE ONLY TWENTY FIFTY THE
NEXT INSTEAD OF TWENTY TWO
HUNDRED AND MILLION DOLLAR
CONDO MIGHT BE ONLY A MILLION
FIFTY NEXT YEAR INSTEAD OF ONE
POINT ONE MILLION.
THE SLOWING THE RATE OF GROWTH
IN THE HIGH END HOUSING MARKET
DOES NOT HELP THE MIDDLE.
THOSE SEGMENTS MUST BE DIRECTLY
ADDRESSED.
THEY ARE NOT BEING ADDRESSED.
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG'S LAST
NIGHT SAID THERE'S CONFUSION IN
THE COMMUNITY ABOUT WHAT IS THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, WHAT IS
ZONING WHILE THE MAYOR'S GOT IT
WRONG.
SO YES, IT IS CONFUSING.
LOOK AT HIS FACEBOOK PAGE.
>> HE'S GOT IT WRONG.
LET'S ADMIT THAT THIS IS
CONFUSING AND BE A LITTLE
EASIER ON THE PEOPLE WHO DON'T
UNDERSTAND THIS.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
REAL FROM THE KEY AND I'M A BIT
BEHIND ON THIS PROCESS.
I JUST STARTED READING YOUR
YOUR PRODUCT TODAY SO EXCUSE ME
FOR THAT.
I'M NOT GOING TO FOCUS ON
CHAPTER FOUR.
I'M GOING TO START AT THE
BEGINNING THE THE I HAVE A
COUPLE OF SPECIFIC POINTS AND
THEN A COUPLE OF GENERAL
POINTS.
LET'S START WITH A SPECIFIC
ONES.
THERE ARE A NUMBER
OF STATEMENTS IN JUST THE PART
THAT I SKIM THROUGH A HALF AN
HOUR AGO THAT'S TALKING ABOUT
BUILDING MORE HOUSING WILL WILL
CONTRIBUTE TO THE TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BUY CONTRIBUTING TO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND.
I'VE SEEN THAT STATEMENT.
I'VE HEARD THAT STATEMENT
HUNDREDS OF TIMES AND IT REALLY
NEEDS TO BE PUT IN CONTEXT ONE
UNIT OF NEW HOUSING THE
CONTRIBUTION TO THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING FUND IS WOULD TAKE TWO
THOUSAND YEARS TO BUILD ONE
UNIT IT'S MINUSCULE POINT ZERO
ZERO ZERO FIVE.
SO IF YOU HAVE A TWO HUNDRED
UNIT HOUSING A BIG DEVELOPMENT
THAT'S GOING TO TAKE TEN YEARS
A DECADE TO PRODUCE ONE UNIT
OUT OF THE FOUR INTO THE OUT
OF THE TAXES THAT THAT UNIT
PAYS INTO THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING FUND THAT CONTEXT NEEDS
TO BE PROVIDED BECAUSE THAT
STATEMENT OTHERWISE IS SEVERELY
DISINGENUOUS MAJOR LEAGUE
DISINGENUOUS.
THE NEXT POINT THE THERE'S A
CARTOON OR YOU KNOW I GUESS I
CALL THAT A STRIP COMIC STRIP
ON SMALL BUSINESS NEEDS
ENVIRONMENT FOR A FOUR TO GROW.
I AGREE WITH THAT AND TAKE ONE
DID THE OPPOSITE OF THAT MADE
EVERY EVERY SINGLE BUSINESS
DONE ON THOSE STRIPS VULNERABLE
TO BEING DISPLACED.
YOU'RE DECIDING NO INNOVATION
DISTRICT.
WELL THAT'S STRIKE TWO NO
EMPLOYEE DISTRICT.
THAT'S STRIKE THREE IF YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT MAKING
ENVIRONMENT FOUR FOR SMALL
BUSINESSES TO GROW THE THINGS
THAT YOU'RE DOING ARE THE
OPPOSITE.
AND THE THE OTHER THING IS IF
YOU LOOK AT SAY PACARD YORK ET
CETERA, ET CETERA, IF THAT'S
MADE INTO A OK, WE CAN BUILD
SEVEN STORIES HERE.
THOSE BUSINESSES WILL ALSO BE
VULNERABLE.
SO I THINK YOU HAVE TO BE
REALLY CAREFUL ABOUT MATCHING
THE DEEDS WITH THE WORDS THAT
ARE IN THE PLAN AND THAT'S NOT
BEING DONE YET.
THE I HAVE ONE OTHER A MORE
GENERAL POINT THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RESIDENTS HAVE BEEN MEETING IN
VARIOUS PLACES.
I THINK YOU FIGURED THAT OUT
ALREADY AND I WENT TO ONE
MEETING IN IN IN WATER HILL.
THERE ARE PEOPLE THERE THAT
COULD REACH A CONSENSUS IF THEY
WERE GIVEN A CHANCE.
BUT YOU DIDN'T NONE OF THIS
ENGAGEMENT HAS MET WITH ANY
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION OR
NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE PEOPLE CAN
GET TOGETHER AND TALK ABOUT IT
THERE THERE IS A CONSENSUS THAT
IT IS POSSIBLE TO BE REACHED
BUT THIS PROCESS DIDN'T EVEN
TRY TO ATTEMPT TO DO THAT AND
THAT FAILED.
THANK YOU.
WELCOME.
HELLO.
HI.
STEVE GUTTERMAN FIVE FIVE ONE S
ASHLEY STREET.
I ALSO OWN RENTAL PROPERTIES AT
SEVEN ONE THREE AND SEVEN ONE
FIVE MILLER AND JUST IN GENERAL
AND THE ONE OF THE CHIEF
RATIONALES FOR INCREASED
DENSITY IT'S NOT A SIMPLE
SUPPLY AND DEMAND CURVE MEET UP
WHEN YOU'RE IN A MARKET LIKE
ANN ARBOR OR JUST ABOUT ANY
OTHER MARKET IN THE COUNTRY
WHICH IS A VERY DESIRABLE
MARKET TO LIVE IN THE BEST
OF MY KNOWLEDGE THERE IS ZERO
EVIDENCE THAT THE INCREASE IN
UNITS IN BOTH RENTAL AND
OWNERSHIP HOUSING IN THE PAST
SEVERAL YEARS HAS HAD ANY
NEGATIVE PRESSURE ON HOUSING
COSTS IN THIS CITY THERE IS NO
EVIDENCE AS FAR AS I'M AWARE
THAT IT'S GOING TO HAVE
NEGATIVE PRESSURE IN THE FUTURE
ASIDE FROM THE SET ASIDE UNITS
BASED ON PERCENTAGE OF AREA
MEDIAN INCOME, NONE OF THE
UNITS THAT HAVE BEEN BUILT IN
THE HIGH RISES OVER THE PAST
SEVERAL YEARS ARE AFFORDABLE TO
MIDDLE
LOWER MIDDLE CLASS
INCOMES NONE.
SO I DON'T I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
ACTUAL EVIDENCE AS WE ARE
CONTINUING TO MOVE HEADLONG
INTO THE SUPER DENSIFICATION
OF THIS CITY THUS I HAVE NOT
SEEN ANY OF IT.
A MORE GENERAL COMMENT IS THE
TERM AFFORDABLE HOUSING?
IT'S A VERY POORLY DESIGNED TO
FIND TERM I THINK IN MANY
PEOPLE'S MINDS AFFORDABLE
HOUSING MEANS HOUSING THAT IS
WORKFORCE AFFORDABLE,
AFFORDABLE TO WORKERS, POSTAL
WORKERS, TEACHERS ETC. WHAT
WE'RE OFTEN TALKING ABOUT WHEN
WE SAY AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS
ACTUALLY VERY LOW INCOME TO NO
INCOME AND OFTEN SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING THAT IS HIGHLY
SUBSIDIZED.
SO THE HOUSING THAT THE HOUSING
COMMISSION PROVIDES THAT IS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WE REALLY
NEED SOME CLARIFICATION ON
TERMS BECAUSE EVERYONE USES THE
TERM AFFORDABLE HOUSING VERY
LOOSELY.
IT MEANS VERY DIFFERENT THINGS
DEPENDING ON THE CONTEXT.
ANOTHER SEMANTIC ISSUE IS
ZONING, ZONING HAS BEEN GETTING
A SUPER BAD RAP THE LAST FEW
YEARS GETTING RID OF ZONING OR
SIGNIFICANTLY CHANGING ZONING
HAS BEEN SEEN AS YOU KNOW THE
ANSWER TO CREATING MORE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THIS
COUNTRY AND THE TERM
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING WHICH IS
PRETTY PEJORATIVE SOUNDING GETS
ATTACHED A LOT MORE ZONING IS
INCLUDED EXCLUSIONARY IT IS BY
DEFINITION EXCLUSIONARY ALL
ZONING.
SO THE ZONING THAT PREVENTS A
GAS STATION FROM BEING BUILT
NEXT TO MY HOUSE IS
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING ETC. AND
YOURS AS WELL.
>> THANKS VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE PRESENT I'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME.
>> WELCOME.
HI.
I'LL BE BRIEF.
MY NAME IS ERIC RENNOLDS.
I LIVE AT TWENTY ONE ON ONE
DEVON ROAD.
I JUST WANTED TO EXPRESS MY
SUPPORT FOR ALL THE WORK THAT
YOU GUYS ARE DOING HAVE PUT
INTO THIS PROCESS.
>> WE OBVIOUSLY HAVE AN
AFFORDABILITY PROBLEM IN THIS
CITY AS THERE IS IN CITIES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
I'VE LIVED ALL OVER THE COUNTRY
WITH MY CAREER.
I'VE BEEN HERE TWENTY YEARS.
I LIVE IN A BEAUTIFUL
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I BELIEVE THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
WOULD STILL BE BEAUTIFUL IF
THERE WERE LOGICAL ADDITIONS TO
IT TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL
HOUSING AND I JUST WANT TO
EXPRESS MY SUPPORT FOR THIS.
THANKS.
THANK YOU.
>> DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE
PRESENT I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS TIME?
WELL MR. GARBER THANK YOU
GERRI.
NICE TO SEE YOU BACK AGAIN.
AND PLANNING COMMISSION KEN
GARBER WHEN YOU HAVE YOUR HOME
COURT I WILL SPEAK TO CHAPTER
FOUR AND LIKE MR. REYNOLDS, I
WANT TO EXPRESS MY APPRECIATION
FOR ALL THE WORK YOU'RE DOING
YOUR READING MEETING ON A
WEEKLY BASIS APPARENTLY FOR
VERY LONG MEETINGS AND I KNOW
THIS IS NOT EASY WITH BOTH
OF YOU ALL OF YOU HOLDING JOBS
,MANY OF YOU WITH KIDS AND
OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES.
UM, TWENTY ONE OF THE STAFF'S
QUESTIONS IN YOUR PACKET
TONIGHT IS THE FOLLOWING
NUMEROUS SUBJECTIVIST REFERENCE
DECARBONIZATION IS THE GOAL IS
THIS THE RIGHT SPECIFICIALLY
LEVEL FOR FUTURE LAND USE
DECISION MAKING?
I WOULD ARGUE FOR MORE
SPECIFICITY.
>> NOWHERE IS THERE ANY MENTION
OF NATURAL GAS OR HEAT PUMPS.
THAT'S DESPITE CALLS IN THE H0
PLAN LIKE THIS ONE ON PAGE
THIRTY TWO QUOTE ALL NEW
RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL
BUILDINGS ARE DESIGNED AND
BUILT TO OPERATE WITHOUT THE
USE OF NATURAL GAS REDUCING THE
INCREASED COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
RETROFITTING EXISTING SYSTEMS
AND SIMILAR WORDING SHOULD BE
IN THE CURRENT PLAN.
IF YOU WANT TO BORROW IT FROM
H0, YOU MIGHT ARGUE THAT THIS
IS NOT A LAND USE ISSUE.
TRUE, BUT NEITHER IS BUILDING
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND THERE'S A
HALF DOZEN REFERENCES TO THAT
IN THE DRAFT PLAN.
HOW SUSTAINABLE IS ONE OF THE
FOUR BASIC VALUES AND BUILDINGS
ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR TWO THIRDS
OF THE CITY'S GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS SO THE PLAN SHOULD BE
EXPLICIT ABOUT WHAT SHOULD BE
DONE WITH THOSE BUILDINGS.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY ISN'T ENOUGH.
I'LL REMIND YOU THAT THE
COMPLAN ARE AMONG THE PLANS
THAT THE PLAN WILL BE REPLACING
IS THE ANN ARBOR SUSTAINABILITY
FRAMEWORK.
ONE GOAL IN THE FRAMEWORK IS TO
ELIMINATE NET GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS IN OUR COMMUNITY END
QUOTE.
THIS WAS WRITTEN TWELVE YEARS
AGO.
THE CURRENT PLAN DRAFT PLAN
REFERS TO REDUCING
CARBON EMISSIONS SO WE'VE GONE
FROM ELIMINATING TO REDUCING
NOW ELIMINATING NET EMISSIONS
MAY SEEM IMPOSSIBLE BUT IT'S
STILL A PROPER GOAL.
THAT'S BECAUSE CO2 STAYS IN THE
ATMOSPHERE FOR CENTURIES.
GLOBAL HEATING WORSENS WITH
EVERY CUBIC METER OF FOSSIL GAS
THAT WE BURN AND OUR
CARBON BUDGET FOR A STABLE
CLIMATE IS ALREADY GONE.
THE ONLY QUESTION NOW IS HOW
BAD IS IT GOING TO GET?
REDUCING EMISSIONS JUST MEANS
THE RATE OF TEMPERATURE RISE IS
LESS BUT WILL STILL GO UP.
SO IN TERMS OF CLIMATE, THE
DRAFT PLAN IS A REGRESSION AND
A RETREAT FROM OUR EXISTING
GOALS AS SET FORTH IN ONE
OF THE PLANS IT'S REPLACING DO
WE REALLY WANT TO GO BACKWARDS
ON CLIMATE?
FINALLY I'D LIKE TO EXPRESS MY
APPRECIATION TO OR BENDAT FOR
THE WORK SHE'S DONE ON THE
PLAN.
I KNOW SHE'S PUTTING IN
EXTREMELY LONG HOURS AND UNLIKE
MOST OF US SHE HAS TO ENDURE
VERY PUBLIC CRITICISM OF THE
CONTENT AND THE ESTHETICS
OF HER WORK WHICH AFTER ALL IS
JUST A DRAFT PLAN AND I KNOW
SHE'S VERY SHE'S BEEN VERY
STOIC UNDER THIS BARRAGE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
DO YOU HAVE ANYONE ELSE YOU'D
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME
OK WITH WHAT DO YOU HAVE
ANY REMOTE CALLERS ON THE LINE
YOU MARY HENDERSON, YOU HAVE
THREE MINUTES TO HELLO MY NAME
IS MARY HENDERSON.
>> I LIVE AT 14 16 BROOKLYN.
I'M OPPOSED TO THE ELIMINATION
OF SINGLE FAMILY DUPLEX ZONING
IN ANN ARBOR AND THIS IS WHAT
IS PROPOSED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I WANT TO START BY ENCOURAGING
ANYONE WHO HAS CONCERNS ABOUT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND THE
LACK OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO
CONSIDER SIGNING THE ELECTRONIC
PETITION THAT IS CIRCULATING
ASKING THE CITY TO SUSPEND THE
PLANNING PROCESS TO TELL ALL
RESIDENTS ARE FULLY INFORMED
ABOUT THE PLAN TO GET THE LINK
PLEASE EMAIL HETTA AND TO
CONTACT AT GMAIL DOT COM THAT'S
A IS AN APPLE THE NUMBER TWO
AND AS A NANCY THE NO TO
CONTACT AT GMAIL DOT COM TROLLS
HAVE SET UP A FAKE WEBSITE
PURPORTING TO BE THE WEBSITE
OF THE ANN ARBOR NEIGHBORHOOD
NETWORK AETNA INTO AND THEY'VE
ALSO SET UP A FAKE PETITION
THAT MIRRORS THE DATA AND TO
PETITION.
SO PLEASE BE SURE THAT YOU GET
THE PETITION LINKED THROUGH AND
TO CONTACT AT GMAIL DOT COM
OTHERWISE YOU MAY FEEL THAT
YOU'VE SIGNED THE PETITION BUT
IT MAY BE THE FAKE PETITION
ITOU AND WHO DOES NOT PRESENTLY
HAVE A WEBSITE SO ANY TO ENTER
WEB SITE YOU FIND IS FAKE WITH
REGARD TO COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
ON PAGE TWENTY SEVEN OF THE
CURRENT PLAN THE BIGGEST NUMBER
TO POP OUT IS THE THREE
THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED PLUS
SURVEYS.
I OBTAINED A COPY OF THAT
SURVEY AND THERE IS ABSOLUTELY
NOTHING IN THE SURVEY THAT
RELATES TO ZONING, ELIMINATING
ZONING, ADDING DUPLEXES, PLEXUS
COMPLEXES OR APARTMENT
BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
OR ADDING ANY OTHER KIND
OF DENSITY IN NEIGHBORHOODS.
IT'S MOSTLY QUESTIONS LIKE HOW
LONG HAVE YOU LIVED IN ANN
ARBOR?
DO YOU OWN OR RENT?
DO YOU HAVE CHILDREN?
WHERE DO YOU SHOP?
IT'S BASICALLY JUST A
DEMOGRAPHIC SURVEY.
THE WORD ZONE ZONING DO NOT
SHOP ANYWHERE IN THE SURVEY THE
WORD DENSITY DOES NOT SHOW UP
ANYWHERE THAT WHERE DUPLEX
SHOWS UP ONLY ONCE UNDER THE
QUESTION OF WHAT TYPE
OF HOUSING DO YOU LIVE IN THE
WORDS TRIPLEX AND COMPLEX DO
NOT SHOW ANYWHERE EITHER.
IN FACT THERE'S SO LITTLE IN
THE SURVEY THAT BEARS ANY
RELATIONSHIP TO THE PLAN THAT I
CONTACTED THE PLANNING STAFF TO
MAKE SURE THAT I HAVE THE
CORRECT SURVEY.
THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT DIDN'T
DISPUTE MY CLIENT'S AND THEIR
RESPONSE WAS THAT QUOTE THE
SUMMARY OF RESULTS WE'RE
REVIEWING IN THE DRAFT PLAN
COMES FROM OTHER EXERCISES WE
CONDUCTED WITH THE PUBLIC AND
QUOTE SO WITH THAT BEING THE
CASE, THE THREE THOUSAND ONE
HUNDRED PLUS SURVEY SHOULD NOT
BE CITED IN THE CURRENT PLAN AS
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.
I'D ALSO LIKE TO NOTE THAT THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE
ANAMBRA CITY COUNCIL HAVE GONE
TO GREAT LENGTHS TO PREVENT
RESIDENTS FROM DEDUCING THAT
THE CURRENT PLAN WILL ELIMINATE
SINGLE FAMILY AND DUPLEX ZONING
NOWHERE IN THE 124 PAGE
DOCUMENT AS IT MENTIONED THAT
ONE OUTCOME OF THE CURRENT PLAN
WILL BE ELIMINATION OF SINGLE
FAMILY AND ZONING AT THE NEARBY
CITY COUNCIL ON THE PLANNING
COMMISSION ELIMINATING SINGLE
FAMILY DUPLEX ZONING IS GOOD
FOR THE CITY WITH THE MAJORITY
OF RESIDENTS WANT THEM.
WHY ARE THEY NOT COMING RIGHT
OUT AND STATING THAT WILL BE
ONE CONSEQUENCE OF THE PLAN.
THANK YOU.
WE HAVE OTHER CALLERS ADAM
JUSZKIEWICZ, BEAMINSTER.
HELLO THIS IS ADAM SAVAGE
CALLING FROM FOURTEEN THIRTY
LAS VEGAS DRIVE IN THE FOURTH
WARD.
NOT THAT IT SHOULD MATTER BUT
IN LIEU OF HAVING AN ASTERISK
NEXT TO MY NAME I'M A HOMEOWNER
BORN AND RAISED IN ANN ARBOR.
I ACTUALLY LIKE THE CARTOONS,
PHOTOGRAPHS AND GRAPHICS.
A DRY WALL OF TEXT IS NOT
SOMETHING PEOPLE ARE GOING TO
READ.
I THINK THIS APPROACH IS MORE
ACCESSIBLE IN GENERAL.
I SUPPORT THIS PLAN.
I THINK IT DOES NOT GO FAR
ENOUGH IN TERMS OF ALLOWING
MORE DENSITY WITHIN MY OWN
NEIGHBORHOOD, PARTICULARLY WITH
COUNCIL'S RECENT RESOLUTION.
I WAS HOPING FOR SOMETHING MORE
RADICAL BUT I'M ECSTATIC THAT
WE ARE FOLLOWING MANY OTHER
CITIES ELIMINATING EXCLUSIONARY
SINGLE FAMILY ZONING AND THIS
IS A DRAMATIC IMPROVEMENT OVER
OUR BROKEN STATUS QUO IN THE
FACE OF A SEVERE SHORTAGE
OF HOMES.
I LIKE THE WAY CHAPTER FOUR IS
BROKEN DOWN INTO SECTIONS
OF RELATED GOALS.
IT MAKES IT EASY TO FOLLOW THE
RATIONALES AND HOW THEY MAP
BACK TO THE OVERALL VALUES
.
I LIKE WHAT THE PLAN IS SAYING
HERE AND AGREE WITH THE GOALS
OVERALL I WANT TO FOCUS ON A
COUPLE SPECIFIC GOALS THAT
JUMPED OUT TO ME IN SOME WAYS I
SEE THEM COMPLIMENTING EACH
OTHER.
I THINK THEY ALSO NEED TO BE
EMPHASIZED MORE HEAVILY
ESPECIALLY CONSIDERING THE
COUNCIL'S RECENT RESOLUTION TO
ELIMINATE TO TO LIMIT THE
POSSIBLE DENSITY GROWTH WITHIN
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
FIRST OF ALL, UNDER FOR
ENCOURAGE WALKABLE CONNECTED
NEIGHBORHOODS WITH ACCESS TO
BASIC NEEDS AMENITIES.
THIS HAS THREE STRATEGIES
AROUND REPURPOSING
UNDERUTILIZED PUBLIC LAND FOCUS
AND DENSITY ALONG TRANSIT
CORRIDORS WHERE THERE IS
EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE AND
AMENITIES TO SUPPORT IT AND
ADDING LIMITED SMALL SCALE
COMMERCIAL USES WITHIN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND QUOTE
IMPROVED MOBILITY OPTIONS FOR
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE COMMERCIAL
AMENITIES ARE UNLIKELY UNQUOTE
.
I THINK THERE'S ANOTHER
OPPORTUNITY HERE LOOK AT USING
UNDERUTILIZED PUBLIC LAND, NEW
ACQUISITIONS OF OPEN SPACE AND
PUBLIC BENEFITS FROM DEVELOPERS
TO CREATE SOME OF THESE
IMPROVED MOBILITY OPTIONS.
I'M PARTICULARLY THINKING ABOUT
THINGS LIKE LINEAR PARKS OR
PAVED AND LIGHTED CUT THROUGH
THAT PROVIDE MORE DIRECT
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ACCESS
BETWEEN THE INTERIOR OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD AND NEARBY MAJOR
CORRIDORS.
THE AMENITIES AND BUS STOPS.
THESE WOULD ALSO GIVE PEOPLE
LIVING IN DENSER DEVELOPMENTS
ALONG THE CORRIDOR MORE DIRECT
ACCESS TO PARKS AND SCHOOLS
LOCATED IN THE INTERIOR
OF THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS.
THIS WOULD BE PARTICULARLY
USEFUL IN SOME OF OUR MID
CENTURY NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE MY
OWN THAT HAVE WINDING
DISCONNECTED STREETS AND CUL DE
SAC.
THESE STREET LAYOUTS DO A GOOD
JOB OF CALMING CAR TRAFFIC BUT
CAN MAKE PEDESTRIAN TRIPS
UNNECESSARILY LONG AND
INDIRECT.
A RELATED GOAL IS GOAL NINE
INVESTMENT STREET AND
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM THAT
RESPONDS TO LAND USE AND
PRIORITIZES SAFE AND EQUITABLE
ACCESS.
I DON'T THINK CAN BE OVERSTATED
HOW ESSENTIAL THIS GOAL IS AS
OUR CITY GROWS IT'S GEOMETRY
PROBLEM WE SIMPLY MUST
DEEMPHASIZE.
WE GET AROUND WITHIN ANN ARBOR
PARTICULARLY AS WE'RE PLANNING
TO PUT THE MAJORITY OF NEW
HOMES ON HIGH TRAFFIC CAR
SEWERS.
IT'S NOT EQUITABLE WITHOUT A
MAJOR FOCUS AND COMMITMENT TO
MAKING THOSE CORRIDORS SAFE.
WE SEEM TO BE PROTECTING
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER AT THE
EXPENSE OF PUTTING MORE PEOPLE
IN HARM'S WAY WITH TRAFFIC
VIOLENCE, AIR POLLUTION AND
NOISE POLLUTION.
THESE CORRIDORS ARE OUR MOST
DANGEROUS STREETS PUSHING OUR
DENSITY MAINLY TO AREAS WITH
THE MOST HEAVY IMPACTS FROM
CARS WITHOUT TAKING SERIOUS
DECISIVE STEPS TO MITIGATE
THOSE IMPACTS ISN'T ACCESSIBLE
ISN'T ACCEPTABLE.
HOW CAN WE MAKE SURE THESE
MITIGATIONS HAPPEN IF WE WILL
BE LINING THESE CORRIDORS WITH
HOMES IT'S MORE IMPORTANT THAN
EVER WRECKING YOUR DINNER TO
HEAR FROM ALL OF US TONIGHT.
THANK YOU MARIANNE CERUZZI.
>> YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
ADDRESS THE COMMISSION.
>> THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS MARY ANN SOROSES.
I LIVE AT THIRTEEN TWENTY TWO
BROOKLYN.
>> THANK YOU FOR ALL YOUR WORK.
I'M JUST GETTING ACCLIMATED TO
THIS PROPOSAL.
I HAVEN'T HEARD ABOUT IT BEFORE
EVEN THOUGH I THINK I KEEP IN
TOUCH WITH THINGS WE DON'T
REALLY HAVE A HOMETOWN
NEWSPAPER ANYMORE.
SO IT'S A NEIGHBORHOOD IT'S
NEIGHBORHOOD TALKING YOU KNOW
NEIGHBORS TALKING TO EACH
OTHER.
I I LIKE THE IDEA OF HAVING
SOME DENSIFICATION IN THE CITY.
I THINK, YOU KNOW, WE CAN GO
INTO HOW PRETTY SOME OF THESE
BUILDINGS ARE BUT THEY WON'T WE
HAVE TO ADMIT THEY WON'T LOWER
THE PRICES.
A COUPLE OF COMMENTATORS, THEY
WON'T LOWER THE PRICES TO MAKE
IT MORE AFFORDABLE FOR THE
MIDDLE INCOME FOLKS OR THE
YOUNG YOUNG FAMILIES AND SOME
DENSIFICATION MAKES SENSE IN
THE TRANSIT CORRIDORS.
BUT I AGREE WITH SOME OF THE
OTHER COMMENTATORS THAT WE
DON'T YOU HAVE TO REALLY
CONSIDER THE INFRASTRUCTURE,
THE ELECTRICAL SYSTEM, THE
WATER, THE SEWAGE AND WHETHER
THEY ALL OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
IF WE WERE TO CHANGE ZONING ALL
OVER THE CITY, WHETHER THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE IS UP TO THE
TASK.
I ALSO AGREE WITH A COUPLE
OF THE COMMENTATORS WHO SAID
THAT ONE SIZE FITS ALL FOR
ZONING DOESN'T YOU KNOW, THAT
IS A DRASTIC CHANGE CONTRARY TO
WHAT THE WHAT THE DRAFT PLAN
SAYS, IT IS A DRASTIC CHANGE
AND I'M NOT REALLY SURE IT'S
NECESSARY.
AT LEAST THERE'S NO EVIDENCE
THAT IT'S NECESSARY TO ONE SIZE
FITS ALL CHANGES THE OTHER.
THERE'S BEEN A NUMBER
OF COMMENTS ON THE LEVEL
OF ENGAGEMENT ON THE SURVEY
ITSELF AND THE LEVEL
OF ENGAGEMENT WITH CITY
RESIDENTS THAT THOSE ARE VALID
CONCERNS.
I HAVE TO I HAVE TO SAY THOSE
THERE'S OTHER WAYS TO BEGIN
TALKING TO THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
IT.
AND SO I THINK YOU'RE HEARING
MORE AND MORE PEOPLE BECAUSE
PEOPLE ARE FINALLY HEARD ABOUT
THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN NOW I I
I TOTALLY GET THAT WE HAVE TO
RAISE REVENUE IN THE CITY.
I MEAN WE'VE WE'VE GOT FORTY
TWO PERCENT OF ANN ARBOR IS IS
TAX EXEMPT ACCORDING TO THE
DRAFT PLAN AND THE YOU MAY HAVE
ALREADY LOOKED AT THIS ANOTHER
COMMITTEE MAY HAVE ALREADY
LOOKED AT THIS BUT HAVE WE
LOOKED AT OR HAS THE CITY
LOOKED AT RAISING REVENUES IN
OTHER WAYS OTHER THAN PURELY
ID?
SO FOR EXAMPLE A NON RESIDENT
CITY TAX WE HAVE TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE WHO
DRIVE IN TO ANN ARBOR EVERY DAY
WHO USE OUR SEWERS, WHO USE OUR
ELECTRICAL LINES, WHO USE OUR
ROADS AND THEY DON'T PAY ANY
TAXES.
THIRTY SECONDS AND THE SO AND
THEN THERE'S OTHER THINGS LIKE
WHAT OTHER UNIVERSITY TOWNS
HAVE DONE.
THEY HAVE THEY HAVE THOSE PILOT
PROGRAMS WHICH ARE PAYMENT IN
LIEU OF TAXES LOOKING INTO
THOSE THINGS WITH THE
UNIVERSITY AND WITH WITH I
DON'T KNOW WHAT OTHER ELEMENTS
OF NONPROFITS ARE WITHIN OUR
OUR THE CONFINES OF THE CITY
BUT LOOKING AT OTHER WAYS TO
RAISE REVENUE FROM THE
UNIVERSITY THAT ISN'T
NECESSARILY PROPERTY TAXES.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR ALL
YOUR WORK.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE OTHER CALLERS ON THE
LINE CALLING FOR NO ENDING WITH
THREE TO SIX YOU CAN OUR SIX
AND ADDRESS THE QUESTION FOR
THREE MINUTES.
>> HELLO, THIS IS JEFF
CROCKETT.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES, AS YOU CAN.
OK, GREAT.
OK SO MY REASON FOR CALLING
TONIGHT IS ABOUT ENGAGEMENT.
>> I KNOW THAT THE MEASURE FOR
YOUR ENGAGEMENT WAS
COMMUNICATED ON THE MASTER PLAN
BY CITING THE SURVEY AND MARY
HENDERSON SPOKE EARLIER ABOUT
HER CONCERNS ABOUT THAT.
THE PROBLEM IS NO ONE HAS
IDENTIFIED ON THE SURVEY AND I
WOULD URGE YOU ALL TO LOOK AT
THE GRAND RAPIDS MASTER PLAN
BECAUSE WHAT THEY DO IS THEY
IDENTIFY ALL THE PEOPLE WHO
PROVIDE INPUT.
THEY'RE LIKE TEN PAGES ABOUT
EIGHTY PEOPLE ON A PAGE
OF INDIVIDUALS WHO PROVIDED
INPUT HERE WE KNOW ABOUT NO ONE
AND WE DON'T KNOW WHERE THEY
LIVE.
SO IT SEEMS THIS IT SEEMS
UNFORTUNATE THAT WE'RE GETTING
INPUT POSSIBLY FROM PEOPLE WHO
DON'T LIVE IN ANN ARBOR.
ALSO WE DON'T KNOW HOW MANY
UNIQUE INDIVIDUALS RESPONDED TO
THE SURVEY.
SO WHILE THERE WERE THIRTY ONE
HUNDRED RESPONSES CITED IN A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, MAYBE
THAT'S ONLY 2000 IF THERE WERE
PEOPLE WHO SUBMITTED MULTIPLE
TIMES BY IDENTIFYING THE NAMES
WE'LL KNOW EXACTLY HOW MANY AND
I WOULD ENCOURAGE YOU TO
PUBLISH THAT INFORMATION.
THE SECOND THING IS IN REGARDS
TO ENGAGEMENT IT STUNS ME THAT
I POSTCARD MAILING WAS NOT SENT
OUT EARLY IN THE PROCESS AND
BASICALLY THIS IS THE WAY YOU
GET ENGAGEMENT IS BY BY SENDING
POSTCARDS TO EVERYONE IN EVERY
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEEN THOUSAND
BUT CITY COUNCIL SET ASIDE ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND IN THE RECENT
BUDGET TO DO EXACTLY THIS FOR
CITIZENS ENGAGEMENT.
I'M PLEASED THAT THE COUNCIL
MEMBER TESCHE THAT SHE WAS
GOING TO BE DOING THIS AND I'M
ALSO VERY PLEASED THAT COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH HAS SET UP A CIVIC
ENGAGEMENT SESSION FOR THE
MASTER PLAN.
OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR
SOMETIME IN MAY FOR PEOPLE AND
I'M APPRECIATIVE THAT AND TO
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON BUT I'M
EXPECTING THAT ALL COUNCIL
MEMBERS DO THAT PROVIDE SOME
KIND OF LOCAL FORUM SO PEOPLE
CAN SIT DOWN AND SORT OF GO
THROUGH ALL THIS.
>> SO THERE IS STILL TIME AND I
AM URGING THIS GROUP TO SEND A
POSTCARD MAILING AND PROVIDE
INFORMATION SUCH AS THE SURVEY
YOU HAVE IT ALSO CITIZEN
PARTICIPATION MEETING SO THAT
EVERYONE IN IN OUR AREA WILL BE
REASSURED WILL BE INFORMED
OF THE CHANGES THAT ARE COMING
DOWN WITH THIS COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
THANKS FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION.
THANK YOU
.
>> NO OTHER CALLERS, CHARLIE.
>> THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> WE'RE GOING TO CLOSE PUBLIC
COMMENT EXCUSE ME.
I SKIPPED DINNER.
>> SO CHARLIE, SINCE SINCE YOU
CLOSED THERE BEEN A COUPLE
OF ANSWERS WOULD YOU LIKE TO
OF GET CHUCK?
>> I THINK THEY WERE EXPECTING
HERE A FEW SECONDS.
>> OH, GOTCHA.
MY APOLOGIES.
NOBODY I YES.
THAT'S PERFECTLY THANK YOU
SIMPLY MIDDLETON YOU CAN
ADDRESS THE QUESTION FOR THREE
MINUTES.
I LIVE AT FORTY TWO BROOKLYN
AVENUE.
I JUST WANTED TO SAY THAT I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PAUSE SO
THAT THERE IS MORE TIME FOR
DISCUSSION AND INPUT.
I REALLY I I AM JUST LEARNING
ABOUT THIS.
I HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO READ THE
WHOLE DOCUMENT THE THINGS THAT
I'VE READ BEEN CONCERNING AND I
GENERALLY I THINK I'M SUPPOSED
TO THE ELIMINATION OF THE
SINGLE FAMILY AND DUPLEX ZONING
.
I'M ALSO CURIOUS, AS MARY
MENTIONED, WHETHER OR NOT
THERE'S BEEN ANY INQUIRY INTO
OTHER WAYS OF RAISING REVENUE.
SO YOU KNOW, THERE ARE A LOT
OF QUESTIONS I GUESS AND I AND
I JUST THINK MORE DISCUSSION
NEEDS TO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> LISA JAVINS, YOU HAVE THREE
MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE QUESTION
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE YOU
CAN HEAR ME.
I HAD TROUBLE WITH MY SOUND
LAST TIME.
LOOKING VERY EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS LISA JAVINS.
I LIVE AT TEN FIFTY FOUR MARTIN
PLACE.
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE TERM
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING WHICH
APPEARS SIX TIMES IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DRAFT.
THIS IS A PERSONAL VALUE
JUDGMENT APPLIED TO A SET
OF LEGAL ZONING RULES THAT
GOVERN MOST NON STUDENT
RESIDENTS LIVE WHICH IS IN THE
AIR IN IN OUR TWO ZONES AS
OTHER COMMENTERS HAVE ALREADY
STATED AREN'T ALL ZONES
EXCLUSIONARY OF SOMETHING OR
OTHER BY NATURE OF COURSE THEY
ARE.
THERE ARE SETS OF RULES THIS
DEROGATORY PERSONAL VALUE
JUDGMENT NOW GUIDES THE
RESIDENTIAL LAND USE PLAN
NARRATIVE.
WHY THE DRAFT PLAN RECOMMENDS
MAKING ALL HOUSING TYPES
AVAILABLE ISN'T A SINGLE FAMILY
HOME SIMPLY JUST ANOTHER
HOUSING TYPE?
IT'S MERE EXISTENCE DOES NOT
PREVENT ANYBODY FROM BUILDING
DIFFERENT HOUSING TYPES IN THE
R FOR C THE R TO A THE DC ONE
OR READ A FEW BUILDERS CAN AND
ARE DOING THIS NOW ALL OVER THE
CITY.
ACCORDING TO AN EMOTIVE ARTICLE
ON JANUARY 5TH APPROXIMATELY 50
HOUSING PROJECTS ARE IN PROCESS
RIGHT NOW THEY REPRESENT
APPROXIMATELY FIVE THOUSAND NEW
HOUSING UNITS INCLUDING
APARTMENTS, SINGLE FAMILY HOMES
,TOWN HOMES, DUPLEXES AND
CONDOS.
IN ADDITION THERE ARE 2300
PRIVATE DORMITORY UNITS AND
TWENTY ONE HUNDRED UNIVERSITY
DORMITORY BEDS ON THE WAY.
SEVERAL HUNDRED AFFORDABLE
UNITS ARE INCLUDED IN THESE
NUMBERS.
NONE OF THIS IS LOWERING PRICES
SO RESIDENTS DO NOT SEE BUY
HOMES IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS
SHOULD BE NEXT CHERRY PICKED BY
SPECULATORS TORN DOWN AND PUT
INTO A LANDFILL FOR WHAT REASON
SO THAT DIFFERENT HOUSING TYPE
DEEMED MORE CORRECT BY YOU CAN
REPLACE WHAT WAS ALREADY THERE
HOUSING PEOPLE IN THE FIRST
PLACE.
I SUGGEST THAT YOU STOP BLAMING
SINGLE FAMILY AND DUPLEX
NEIGHBORHOODS FOR HOUSING
PROBLEMS IN INNER HARBOR.
CLEARLY THEY ARE NOT STOPPING A
RANGE OF NEW HOUSING FROM BEING
BUILT ALL OVER THE CITY.
PLEASE REMOVE THIS SKEWED VALUE
JUDGMENTS FROM THE PLAN AND
FOCUS ON THE FACTS.
YOU ARE INSULTING AND
ALIENATING RESIDENTS WHO ARE
GOING TO BELIEVE THEIR OWN EYES
EVERY TIME AND VOTE ACCORDINGLY
.
>> THANK YOU
LOUIS SPASSKY'S.
>> YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
YES.
GOOD EVENING.
PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY
PLANNING STAFF LUIS VASQUEZ A
NINE ZERO NINE BARTON DRIVE.
FORTY ONE YEAR RESIDENT OF THE
CITY BANABA CALLING TO ADDRESS
TONIGHT GOLDENSON OR NINE THE
TRANSPORTATION STRATEGIES AND
OPTIONS.
WHAT I WOULD SUGGEST IS THAT
ALONG ANY BUS LINE IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR THAT WITHIN A
HUNDRED FEET OF A BUS STOP THAT
YOU ALLOW FOR MUCH HIGHER
DENSITY SUCH AS PERHAPS FIVE OR
EVEN TEN STORIES WITHIN HUNDRED
FEET OF A BUS STOP REGARDING
COAL ELEVEN CARBON NEUTRALITY,
EFFICIENT ENERGY AND RESOURCE
USE THE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY AS MENTIONED THERE.
YOU KNOW, AS AS A HOMEOWNER WHO
HAS PUT SOLAR PANELS ON ONE
OF MY HOUSES, I WOULD BE
DISTRESSED IF YOU KNOW A
BUILDING WERE TO GO UP NEXT
DOOR THAT WOULD BLOCK MY SOLAR
PANELS.
SO I THINK IT IT THAT'S A VERY
VALID CONCERN AND SHOULD BE
PLANNED FOR WITHIN THE PLANNING
DOCUMENT AND TO CLOSE I WOULD
JUST LIKE TO URGE ANYBODY WHO
IS IN THE ANN ARBOR
NEIGHBORHOOD NETWORK INSTEAD
OF SIGNING A PETITION AND I
WOULD URGE YOU ALL TO TAKE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PARTICIPATE IN
MANY OF IN ONE OF THE MANY
UPCOMING EVENTS AND MEETINGS
THAT ARE GOING TO BE HELD BY
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS AND CITY
COUNCIL.
I BE TRYING TO STOP THE PROCESS
RIGHT NOW OR SLOW IT DOWN I
DON'T THINK IS WARRANTED.
WE DO NEED ZONING.
MORE SECONDS IN AN HOUR.
THANK YOU.
THIS LETTER NO HANDS RAISED.
>> GIVE IT A FEW MORE SECONDS.
STILL NO HANDS RAISED.
>> OK WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO
CLOSE UP PUBLIC COMMENT.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR
PARTICIPATION AND YOUR COMMENTS
.
WE APPRECIATE IT AT THIS TIME
OR TO GO ON TO JOIN NUMBER SIX
WHICH IS UNFINISHED BUSINESS.
THERE ARE NONE AND THEN WE'RE
GOING TO GO RIGHT INTO OTHER
BUSINESS WHICH IS COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN REVIEW CHAPTER FOUR.
WE WILL GO TO STAFF INTERACTION
WITH MR. LAWLER.
THANK YOU WITH MISS BENNETT
.
GOOD EVENING, COMMISSIONERS'.
UM, I WANT TO THANK YOU ALL FOR
SENDING IN YOUR EDITS EARLY.
I HOPE YOU SEE IN FRONT OF YOU
YOU HAVE A FOURTEEN PAGE PACKET
WITH YOUR COMPILED EDITS.
SO WE'VE GONE FROM 40 PAGES TO
REVIEW TODAY TO HOPEFULLY 14.
THIS DOES NOT PRECLUDE ANYONE
FROM BRINGING UP SOMETHING NEW
AS WE GO ALONG OR IF YOU DIDN'T
HAVE TIME TO SET IT SEND IN
EDITS PRIOR THAT WE CAN STILL
GO THROUGH THEM THE FIRST PAGE
IS GENERAL.
THEY ARE NOT SPECIFIC TO A
SINGLE SECTION.
>> I WOULD SUGGEST THAT WE MOVE
TO THE ONES THAT ARE SPECIFIC
AND THAT IF YOU FEEL STRONGLY
THAT YOUR COMMENT IS ON THE
GENERAL SECTION THAT YOU CAN
BRING IT UP WHERE WHERE
RELEVANT OR AS AN EXAMPLE
OF WHAT YOU ARE REFERRING TO.
SO THAT WOULD PUT SET PAGE TWO
JUST TO NOTE ON HOW I TRIED TO
ORGANIZE THIS TODAY SO PAGE TWO
IS A GOOD EXAMPLE UNDER THE THE
HEADER HERE HOUSING TARGETS
THERE'S SIX COMMENTS SO I TRIED
TO GROUP THEM TOGETHER TO
ILLUSTRATE TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION WHERE WE MIGHT WANT
TO SPEND A LITTLE MORE TIME AS
MORE PEOPLE HAVE THOUGHTS OR
QUESTIONS ABOUT THOSE TOPICS.
SO I MIGHT STEER US TOWARDS THE
AREAS WHERE THERE ARE MORE THAN
ONE COMMENT.
BUT I AGAIN I DON'T WANT TO
PASS UP ANY OTHER COMMENTS THAT
AREN'T GROUPED IN THAT WAY.
SO PLEASE INTERRUPT ME OR BRING
THEM UP.
BUT I'M TRYING TO KEEP US
FOCUSED AND MOVING MOVING
FORWARD.
>> DOES THAT SOUND OK?
YES, THAT SOUNDS GREAT.
>> VERY ORDERLY.
THANK YOU.
OK, AND JUST A REMINDER SOME
OF THE PROCESSES THAT WE AGREED
UPON IS THAT WE WILL IF WE GET
TO AN AREA WHERE WE THINK WE
NEED TO TAKE A STRAW POLL, WE
WILL DO SO IF IT LOOKS DIVIDED
AND WE MAY MOVE TO A MOTION AND
THAT WAY IT WILL BE RECORDED
THAT WAY.
WE'RE ALSO TAKING NOTES HERE.
I HOPE YOU SAW IN THE AGENDA
PACKET THAT ALL OF THE NOTES
FROM LAST MEETING ARE IN THERE
SO THAT YOU CAN REVIEW THOSE.
IF WE GOT THEM WRONG AT ANY
POINT, PLEASE LET US KNOW.
BUT THIS IS THE COMPILATION
THAT WE WILL PROBABLY BE
SITTING DOWN WITH THE
CONSULTANTS TO GO OVER.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT IT
GETS ON TO THAT DOCUMENT
LEATHERY.
SO JUST A QUICK QUESTION.
SO IF IF WE HAVE LIKE SOMETHING
IN THE GENERAL SECTION AND IT'S
THERE, WE JUST ASSUME THAT
YOU'LL TALK TO THE CONSULTANTS
LIKE WE DON'T NEED TO REITERATE
THOSE THINGS IF THEY'RE ALREADY
YOU'RE WELCOME TO IF YOU THINK
THAT YOU WANT TO CONVEY THAT
POINT TO THE REST OF THE
COMMISSION BECAUSE WE'RE NOT
GOING TO SPEND TIME IT SOUNDS
LIKE ON THE FIRST PAGE RATHER
GENERAL COMMENTS ARE COMPILED.
SO YOU'RE ALSO FREE TO DO THAT.
HOW ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT
TONIGHT'S CHAPTER OR THE
PREVIOUS?
>> UH, JUST I THINK IN GENERAL
LIKE I SPECIFICALLY TELL YOU
ABOUT TONIGHT'S CHAPTER BUT
JUST SORT OF IN GENERAL.
YEAH, I WOULD SO I I JUST
ORGANIZE TO TRY TO KEEP US
FOCUSED.
BUT IF THERE IS SOMETHING THAT
COMES UP PLEASE DON'T HESITATE.
>> THIS IS THE FORUM WHERE WE
WANT TO BE HAVING THIS
DISCUSSION.
OK, THAT'S GOOD.
THANK YOU.
>> AND THEN WE WILL BE
SCROLLING THROUGH SO THAT
EVERYONE CAN SEE WHAT WE'RE
REFERRING TO.
OK SHALL WE START.
>> OH YEAH.
OH COMMISSIONER WIJDAN SORRY.
QUICK QUESTION FOR THE CHAIR.
HOW DO YOU WANT TO DO THE
COMMENTS LAST WEEK WE JUST HAD
A LOT OF MIKES HOT AND WE JUST
TALKED THROUGH BUT IF YOU WANT
TO WAIT TO ACKNOWLEDGE US THAT
SPINE I THINK IT OVER TO YOU.
>> I THINK AN OPEN DISCUSSION
IS FINE SO JUST KEEP IT SIMPLE
.
YEAH, WE ARE QUITE SIMPLE.
YES.
>> JUST TO MAKE SURE I'M CLEAR
BECAUSE I THINK WHAT YOU ARE
ASKING IS IF
THERE'S STUFF ON
THE GENERAL PAGE AND WE DON'T
TALK ABOUT IT TONIGHT, WHAT
HAPPENS TO ARE YOU REVIEWING
THAT WITH THE CONSULTANT OR IF
WE FEEL REALLY STRONGLY ABOUT
IT WE NEED TO BRING IT UP SO
THAT WE CAN ALL TALK ABOUT IT?
I WOULD SAY BRING IT UP IF YOU
FEEL STRONGLY ABOUT IT.
WE CANNOT DISCUSS OTHERWISE WE
WOULD PROBABLY JUST TAKE WHAT
WE HAVE HERE AND WE YOU KNOW,
AT SOME POINT STAFF MIGHT JUST
HAVE TO BE MAKING SOME JUDGMENT
CALLS.
RIGHT.
IF WE DON'T GET TO EVERY SINGLE
EDIT THAT'S DISCUSSED.
SO JUST MAYBE TO KICK US OFF
SPECIFICALLY LIKE ABOUT THESE
HOUSING TARGETS.
ONE OF MY QUESTIONS FROM THE
GENERAL PAGE WAS HOW ARE THESE
OBJECTIVES DEVELOPED?
LIKE WHERE DID THIS COME FROM?
WE SHOULD JUST START THERE IF
YOU WANT TO GO TO THE HOUSING
TARGETS SO WE HAVE TALKED
THROUGH THIS PROCESS ABOUT A
COUPLE OF DIFFERENT HOUSING
NUMBERS.
WE TALKED ABOUT WE SHARED NOT
TARGETS BUT STILL ABOUT RANGES
YOU MIGHT RECALL THIRTY
THOUSAND NINETY SEVEN THOUSAND
THOSE WERE PROJECTIONS MAKING
ASSUMPTIONS BASED ON LAND USE
AREAS OF DIFFERENT LAND
CATEGORIES IN THE FUTURE.
LAND USE MAP GO AHEAD.
WE DIDN'T NEED SPECIFIC I MEANT
OVERALL FOR ALL OF THE
OBJECTIVES.
HOW WERE THOSE DETERMINED?
WAS IT BASED ON THE PUBLIC
INPUT?
WAS IT BASED ON HOW WERE THOSE
WRITTEN NOT WITH A SPECIFIC
NUMBER FOR HOUSING BUT JUST
LIKE ANY OF THESE BULLETS.
WHERE DID THIS COME FROM?
SO VARIOUS SOURCES HOUSING
SPECIFICALLY WAS ARRANGED THAT
DOUBLES AND TRIPLES OUR CURRENT
HOUSING PRODUCTION IN THE CITY
AND THAT WAS INTENDED TO
SIGNIFICANTLY ADVANCE OUR
HOUSING SUPPLY VERSUS A LOT
OF RESEARCH THAT SUGGESTS THAT
ADVANCING SUPPLY IS A EFFECTIVE
TOOL TOWARDS AFFORDABILITY.
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT
SPECIFICALLY IS BUILDING ON
PREVIOUS RESEARCH THAT WAS
DONE.
YOU MIGHT REMEMBER OUR ECONOMIC
EQUITY REPORT WHICH WAS ONE
HUNDRED AND FORTY UNITS PER
YEAR.
SO THAT WAS JUST CARRYING THAT
FORWARD.
WE HAVE NOT MET THAT EVERY YEAR
SO IF ANYTHING THAT'S PROBABLY
A LOW TARGET BUT THAT'S WHERE I
CAME FROM.
OTHER ONES I DON'T THINK THEY
WERE SPECIFIC FROM ENGAGEMENT.
THEY WERE TRYING TO
SPECIFICALLY SET SOMETHING
MEASURABLE FOR US TO WORK ON
ATTAINMENT HAVING MICHELLE AND
THE RESOURCES HERE TO DO
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING ON A
MORE FREQUENT BASIS.
PART OF THAT IS GOING TO BE A
LOT OF MEASUREMENT AND
REPORTING OUT SO SO NO ONE
SOURCE SOME OF THEM MAY HAVE
ALSO COME FROM OTHER PLANTS
LIKE REVY REDUCE VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED IS A GOAL FROM EIGHT
TO ZERO THAT WE'RE TRYING TO
ALIGN WITH.
>> SO THAT'S A CLEAR CONCERN
THAT THEY COME FROM VARIOUS
SOURCES THAT WE TRIED TO
COMPILE HERE.
>> RIGHT.
IT'S ONE THING IT'S MY THIRD
BULLET ON THE GENERAL PAGE.
>> I I'M JUST I'M STRUGGLING
WITH OVERALL IN THIS CHAPTER
THERE'S A LOT OF THERE'S THE
WHAT WE HEARD THERE'S
RATIONALE.
THERE'S DIRECTIVES I GUESS IS
THE RATIONALE AND THERE'S GOALS
AND THERE'S JUST LOTS AND I
DON'T I DON'T REALLY UNDERSTAND
HOW THERE CAN AND MAYBE THEY'RE
NOT ALL CONNECTED BUT I DON'T
KNOW THAT THAT WAS CLEAR ENOUGH
TO ME.
I DON'T KNOW REORDERING THEM
BUT IF NOT EVERYTHING CAME FROM
WHAT WE HEARD I DON'T KNOW IF
IT WOULD BE OBJECTIVE SHOULD
HAVE COME OUT OF SOME SORT
OF PROCESS AND IT WASN'T CLEAR
TO ME LIKE HOW THEY WERE THOSE
ARE OUR OBJECTIVES LIKE WHERE
DID THEY COME FROM?
IT SOUNDS LIKE ALL OVER THE
PLACE MAYBE.
>> WELL, FROM SEVERAL SOURCES
THAT WE HAVE PULLED EITHER LIKE
WE MENTIONED FROM OTHER
DOCUMENTS UM SO WHAT WE'VE
HEARD THAT SHOULD BE AN
INDICATION OF LIKE ENGAGEMENT
AND THAT COULD BE FROM SURVEYS
THAT COULD BE FROM THE OTHER
EXERCISES THAT WE'VE DONE THAT
COULD BE FROM LIKE FOCUS GROUPS
WHERE WE TALK TO OTHER
PROFESSIONALS IN THE FIELD.
SO WHAT WE'VE HEARD I THINK THE
DISTINCTION THEY'RE TRYING TO
MAKE IS ON THE NEXT PAGE LIKE
UNDER RATIONALE WE'RE TRYING TO
BALANCE DATA AND THEN LIKE
PUBLIC SENTIMENT.
RIGHT.
THAT'S SORT OF WHAT A
CONFERENCE PLAN DOES.
>> WE HAVE TO LOOK AT DATA AND
TRENDS.
WE ALSO HAVE TO RECONCILE THAT
WITH WHAT PEOPLE WILL TOLERATE
.
SO I THINK THAT'S HOW THEY'RE
TRYING TO BREAK THIS DOWN IS
THOSE TWO CATEGORIES.
>> SO THEY'RE GOING TO SEPARATE
.
>> THEY'RE SEPARATE BUT THEY
SHOULD BE ALL OF THESE SHOULD
BE MOVING US IN THE DIRECTION
OF MAKING IT CLEAR WHY OUR GOAL
IS OUR GOAL.
RIGHT.
THIS IS OUR JUSTIFICATION.
THIS IS OUR RATIONALE BASED ON
WHAT WE'VE HEARD AND THE DATA
THAT WE'VE PULLED.
>> THESE ARE THE GOALS THAT WE
HAVE.
>> AND ONE OF THINGS THAT I'M
HEARING MIGHT BE AND I THINK
THIS IS A QUESTION THAT I HAD
IS THAT MIGHT BE JUST HELPFUL
TO HAVE A LITTLE BIT OF HOW TO
USE THIS LIKE JUST A BETTER,
MORE EFFECTIVE WAY TO
COMMUNICATING HOW DO THE VALUES
RELATES TO THE GOALS, TO THE
STRATEGY AS TO THE OBJECTIVES?
IT SEEMS LIKE THAT'S PART
OF WHAT'S GOING ON HERE IS THAT
THOSE ARE ALL TERMS AND YOU AS
YOU AS SOMEBODY IS GOING TO USE
THIS WHAT YOU'RE STRUGGLING
WITH THE RELATIONSHIP MAYBE
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE NEED
TO DO THAT COULD BE SOMETHING
THAT WE DO IS JUST AS A
STARTING POINT.
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE THESE TERMS
THROUGHOUT THIS CHAPTER.
THIS IS HOW THEY INTERRELATE.
I THINK THAT IS A LOT OF THEM
START GOING LIKE THE KEY
CONSIDERATION SOUND LIKE
THEY'RE MORE DATA DRIVEN RIGHT
NOW.
>> I DIDN'T I MEAN OBVIOUSLY
LIKE READ THAT BUT I WAS I JUST
COULDN'T FIGURE OUT IN MY HEAD
LIKE HOW THEY WERE RELATING AND
THE OBJECTIVES COMING FIRST
BEFORE JUST LIKE I FEEL LIKE
THE DATA SHOULD SUPPORT
OBJECTIVES WHICH THEN DEVELOP
THE GOALS.
SO MAYBE IT WAS LIKE THE ORDER
THAT DIDN'T WORK FOR ME.
>> I THINK A LIKE A GRAPHIC
DESIGN PROBLEM OR A SOLUTION TO
THIS PROBLEM.
SO SOME COMBINATION TO WHAT
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT WHICH IS
LIKE THE SAMPLE SPREAD BUT THEN
THAT STUFF HAS TO EXIST IN THE
SAME PLACE ON EVERY SINGLE
SPREAD AND RIGHT NOW THERE'S NO
GRAPHIC DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN
THE WHAT WE'VE HEARD THE KEY
CONSIDERATIONS AND THEN THE
SUBCATEGORY LIKE WHAT WE'VE
HEARD HOUSING WHAT WE'VE HEARD
NEIGHBORHOODS KEY
CONSIDERATIONS, HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT SO JUST THERE'S A
HOLOGRAPHIC SOLUTION THERE.
BUT I ALSO AND THEN I GUESS I'M
THINKING ABOUT A FRIEND THAT
JUST SAYS I MIGHT NOT COME IN
AND HAVE BREAKING INTO MORE
MORE CHAPTERS BUT EVEN
SOMETHING THAT SAYS, YOU KNOW,
THERE ARE THREE SECTIONS AND
FOR EACH SECTION THESE ELEMENTS
AND THIS IS HOW I FINISH UP THE
EXACT EVERY TIME.
BUT FOR ME I DON'T I'M
WONDERING WHAT THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A GOAL AND AN OBJECTIVE
WHICH FEELS LIKE THE SAME THING
TO ME AND RIGHT NOW THE
OBJECTIVES ARE A LITTLE MORE
GRANULARITY THERE.
BUT MAYBE THERE'S ALSO A LOT
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
REGULARITY.
SO MAYBE THEY COULD BE
GENERALIZED BUT AND THEN FOLDED
INTO THE GOALS SO LIKE REDUCE
REDUCING VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED
WOULD FIT THEIR GOAL FOR SO I
THINK THAT'S ALSO CONFUSING TO
HAVE GOALS AND THEN OBJECTIVES
AND UNDERSTAND HOW THEY BETTER
.
YEAH, AND I HAD A LOT OF JUST
THE LAST ONES ON BOTH OF THOSE
BECAUSE I HAD A LOT OF THE SAME
LIKE WHAT ARE WE GOING WITH MY
ONE POINT ONE POINT TWO THREE
POINT FOUR LIKE IT WAS KIND
OF I FELT LIKE I WAS A LITTLE
BIT HARD TO UNDERSTAND THE
RELATIONSHIP.
OK, SO WHAT I HAVE WRITTEN IS
WE NEED TO MAKE IT CLEARER HOW
EACH SECTION WITHIN EACH
SECTION, THESE DIFFERENT AREAS
RELATE TO EACH OTHER FOR
EXAMPLE OBJECTIVES WHAT WE'VE
HEARD THE KEY CONSIDERATION INS
AND MORE BROADLY HEARING THAT
THE OBJECTIVES OUT IS CONFUSING
AND THAT THOSE SHOULD BE MAYBE
INTEGRATED INTO THE STRATEGIES
WHERE THEY FIT UNDER THE GOAL
THAT WOULD BE CLEARER.
OK, SO SO LET'S LOOK A PAGE
FORTY SIX WHAT WE HAVE OPEN
THERE ON A CALLOUT BOX ON THE
LEFT I THINK THAT'S A FAIR UM
REORGANIZATIONS.
WE AGREE TO THAT WE CAN DO THAT
.
IT WOULD ALSO BE CLEAR THERE'S
A LITTLE TARGET IN THE
OBJECTIVES BOX AND WE'RE
HEARING A LOT OF CONCERN WHEN
PEOPLE THINK THAT WE'RE
TARGETING YOU KNOW, 30000 TO
65000 NEW HOUSEHOLDS X NUMBER
OF POPULATION WHEN IN FACT I
THINK IT'S MORE THE WAY MR.
LEINERT JUST PUT IT.
THESE ARE PROJECTIONS BUT
THEY'RE CONDITIONED AS YOU
SAID, MATT BENNETT, ON WHAT
PEOPLE WILL TOLERATE AND
THEY'RE CONDITIONED ON WHAT
INFRASTRUCTURE CAN SUPPORT.
AND SO WHEN IT'S STATED LIKE
THIS IT SOUNDS LIKE WE'RE
MARCHING IN THESE DIRECTIONS
WHEN IN FACT WE HAVE NO IDEA
YET WHAT'S EVEN REASONABLE IN
TERMS OF SANITARY SEWER
CAPACITY, LET ALONE WHAT IS
TOLERABLE.
YES.
SO I THINK IT NEEDS TO BE CLEAR
THAT WE UNDERSTAND THAT WE'RE
NOT WE DON'T HAVE HARD AND FAST
NUMBERS THAT WE'RE GOING TO GET
TO NO MATTER WHAT IT TAKES
BECAUSE THAT WOULD BE THAT'S
JUST NOT WHAT WE ARE DOING AND
THERE'S A WAY IN WHICH THIS IT
MAY BE A COMBINATION OF THE
PRESENTATION AND ALSO JUST THE
WORDING LIKE IS IT A TARGET?
IS AN OBJECTIVE IS IT A
PROJECTION?
>> THOSE ARE ALL REALLY
DIFFERENT THINGS.
>> SO OK, I APPRECIATE THAT
POINT.
I THINK IT TOUCHES ON THIS
REOCCURRING THEME OF HOW VAGUE
AND HOW SPECIFIC WE WANT TO BE.
SO YOU CAN IMAGINE IN HERE
PEOPLE HAVE DIFFERENT IDEAS
OF WHAT THAT MEANS.
SO IN SOME INSTANCES WE SAY
THERE'S COMMENTS HERE THAT'S
WAY TOO VAGUE AND NOW WE HAVE
SPECIFIC NUMBERS AND FEELS LIKE
MARCHING ORDERS AS A COMMISSION
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO FIGURE
OUT LIKE WHAT WHAT LEVEL OF OF
THE PUBLIC IS ASKED OF US.
WHAT LEVEL OF SPECIFICITY DO WE
WANT?
AND I WOULD SAY AND I'LL LET
BRETT SPEAK TO THAT NUMBER
SPECIFICALLY BUT NOW THAT THERE
IS SOMEONE ON
STAFF WHO CAN
HELP IMPLEMENT THE PLAN AND
ANNUALLY REVIEW IT SOME SORT
OF METRICS ARE GOING TO BE
NECESSARY FOR US TO FOLLOW
RIGHT TO TO SEE OUR PROGRESS.
AND SO THAT IS EASIER WHEN YOU
HAVE SPECIFIC NUMBERS BUT IT
ALSO DOES HOLD US MAYBE
SOMETHING THAT NEEDS TO BE
CONTEXTUALIZED WITH
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
SO THIS IS A BROADER
CONVERSATION, ONE WHERE I THINK
ONE THING WE'RE GOING TO NEED
CONSENSUS ON AS WE MOVE FORWARD
IS LIKE WHAT'S TOO VAGUE AND
WHAT'S TOO SPECIFIC AND THAT'S
GOING TO DEPEND PROBABLY ON
WHAT THE ACTUAL THING IS THAT
WE'RE LOOKING AT.
I WONDER IF THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DOCUMENT CAN HELP
US HERE IF IT HAS ANY OF THOSE
TARGETS BECAUSE IT'S SOMETHING
THAT'S ALREADY BEEN ADOPTED.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S ALREADY
DRIVING POLICY AND SO THAT WAY
WE CAN JUST STAY IN THAT LOW.
>> YES.
AND I THINK COMMISSIONER ADAMS
BROUGHT THAT REPORT LAST TIME
SO AND I HAVE STARTED LOOKING
AT THAT AND I'LL MAKE A NOTE
OF THAT.
I WOULD ALSO JUST SAY I MEAN WE
ARE PLANNING IN THE CONTEXT
OF A REGION AND A STATE THAT
SPECIFICALLY HAS TARGETS FOR
HOUSING AND SO UNDERSTANDING
THAT I THINK SPECIFICITY IS IN
THIS PARTICULAR INSTANCE IS
FINE AND ACTUALLY IT'S GOING TO
ALLOW US TO MEASURE I LIKE THE
IDEA THAT THERE'S A RANGE
GIVING THE IDEA THAT IT IS NOT
A SPECIFIC NUMBER BUT WE'RE
GOING FOR SOMETHING.
I JUST THINK THE QUESTION THAT
I HAD WAS WHERE DOES THIS
NUMBER COME FROM?
AND SO JUST THE SPECIFICITY YOU
HAD ABOUT THIS IS DOUBLING OR
THIS IS HOW IT LINKS TO WHAT
THE REGION LIKE LATER ON WE
HAVE INFORMATION IN A DIFFERENT
PART WHICH IS WE'RE
CONSOLIDATING SOME OF STUCK
TOGETHER, FOR EXAMPLE, HOW IT
LINKS TO THOSE OTHER PLANS
WOULD BE REALLY USEFUL.
>> I LIKE THE SPECIFICITY TO BE
HONEST.
>> YEAH, THERE'S A LOGIC TO
STATING BROAD GENERAL GOALS AND
THEN ASPIRATIONAL OBJECTIVES TO
TO TRY AND MEASURE MEASURABLE
OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVES TO TRY
AND ACHIEVE THOSE GOALS.
I DO I DIDN'T EVEN CATCH THE
OBJECTIVES ARE STUCK IN A
LITTLE BOX OFF TO THE SIDE SO
FOLDING THEM IN BETTER MAKES
SENSE TO ME.
I'M STILL STRUGGLING THOUGH
WITH WHERE DID ALL OF THIS COME
FROM?
THERE'S A LONG DISCUSSION ABOUT
THE COMMUNITY OUTREACH THAT'S
BEEN DONE AND THAT WE'RE
CONTINUING TO PROMOTE.
BUT WHO IDENTIFIED THESE GOALS
?
WE'RE WHO IDENTIFIED THE
OBJECTIVES THAT ARE STATED.
WAS THAT DRAWN FROM THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT?
WAS IT DONE BY THE STAFF?
WAS IT DONE BY THE PLANNING
CONSULTANT?
THE OBJECTIVES, THE GOALS AND
THE OBJECTIVES AND THE
STRATEGIES?
YEAH, IT WAS THAT WAS STAFF AND
THE CONSULTANTS ATTEMPT TO
SYNTHESIZE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
.
I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT'S GOING ON RIGHT IS
THE ENGAGEMENT HAS BEEN LONG IN
PROCESS.
IT'S BEEN MULTIFACETED AND IT'S
BEEN ASKING DIFFERENT QUESTIONS
.
AND SO I THINK IT'S BEEN
SOMETIMES CONTRADICTORY BECAUSE
A PLURALISTIC COMMUNITY.
YEAH.
SO THE SHORT ANSWER IS THESE
ARE GOALS THAT WE HAVE TRIED TO
ORGANIZE SOME OF THE THEMES
THAT WE'VE ENGAGEMENT INTO
SPECIFIC CATEGORIES OF GOALS
AND STRATEGIES.
>> SO IT WOULD BE HELPFUL
ACTUALLY IT TOOK ME A LITTLE
BIT BUT I FIGURED OUT OK, WHAT
WE'VE IT IS THE COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT.
THE KEY CONSIDERATION SEEM TO
BE THE DATA, THE OBJECTIVE DATA
AND THEN YOU'RE USING THAT TO
DRAW THE GOALS.
IT WOULD BE HELPFUL TO NOT ONLY
ADD AN EXPLANATION OF HOW TO
USE THE PLAN BUT TO DESCRIBE A
LITTLE BIT BETTER THE PROCESS
THOSE WE USED TO TO IDENTIFY
THE GOALS AND THE OBJECTIVES
AND EXPLAIN WHAT YOU'VE JUST
BEEN EXPLAINING TO US TONIGHT.
>> HOW DID WE GET HERE?
UM, WOULD BE A HELPFUL THING TO
DO.
OK, SO WHAT I HAVE SO I'VE
ALREADY REPEATED WE AGREE THAT
THE OBJECTIVES SHOULD BE FOLDED
IN PROBABLY INTO A GOAL THAT
THEY BELONG TO UM AND AND EVEN
MORE SPECIFICALLY THE STRATEGY
UNDER THE GOAL THAT IT ALIGNS
WITH THAT WE NEED TO DESCRIBE
THIS BETTER UM HOW THESE ALL
RELATE TOGETHER AND WHERE THEY
CAME FROM AND THEN SPECIFICALLY
WE RECEIVED LIKE SIX COMMENTS
ABOUT THESE TARGETS NOW THAT
YOU KNOW WHERE THEY CAME FROM I
WANT TO KNOW IF THESE STILL
STAND.
I THINK MANY OF YOU ASKED TO
REMOVE THEM.
UM, SO I WANT TO CHECK IF YOU
WANT TO EXPLAIN THAT FURTHER IF
YOU FEEL DIFFERENTLY NOW YOU
KNOW WHERE THEY CAME FROM.
>> YOU'RE TALKING PAGE FORTY
SIX, PAGE FORTY SIX AND THE
OBJECTIVES BOX THE FIRST BULLET
POINT THIS SPECIFIC TO TWELVE
HUNDRED TO EIGHTEEN HOMES PER
YEAR AFTER TWENTY FIVE YEARS
FOR ME THE ONLY THING THAT I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE IS SOME LEVEL
OF CONSISTENCY WHICH IS IT
HOMES IS AT UNITS I KIND
OF IMMEDIATELY WENT TO TWO
POINT ONE PERSONS PER HOUSEHOLD
BASED ON CENSUS DATA BUT THE
CHALLENGE FOR ME WAS FOR
EXAMPLE THE CURRENT HOUSING
PIPELINE FOR 750 UNITS PER YEAR
RIGHT NOW I WAS HAVING TROUBLE
KIND OF LIKE SAYING WELL SO
WHAT IS HOMES PER YEAR RIGHT.
>> AND SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE TERMINOLOGY IS
CONSISTENT THROUGHOUT SO IF YOU
DO KEEP THE SPECIFICITY, JUST
TRY TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
CONSISTENT IN THAT SPECIFIC
REALM.
AS FAR AS SPECIFICITY I KIND
OF DO LEAD WITH SARAH ON THIS
ONE AND I THINK WE COULD SPEAK
A LITTLE BIT MORE COMMISSIONER
MILLS A LITTLE BIT MORE
CASUALLY ON THIS ONE JUST
BECAUSE WE ARE HAVING AN OPEN
DEBATE.
THE WAY THAT I'M THINKING ABOUT
THIS IS HOW ARE PEOPLE GOING TO
U KNOW, AS A DEVELOPER OR
SOMEBODY WHO IS IN REAL ESTATE
THEY'RE GOING TO LOOK AT THIS
PLAN, RIGHT?
THEY'RE GOING TO SAY OK, OH
SHOOT.
YOU GUYS HAVE DELIVERED AT THIS
POINT EIGHTEEN HUNDRED UNITS.
SO IT'S GOING TO BE NOW LIKE WE
IS IT CAN BE FOUND A POINT,
RIGHT?
>> OH RIGHT.
THAT'S KIND OF MORE THAN THAT.
YEAH WELL LET'S SAY THAT AGAIN
IT WAS JUST KIND OF A BUSY
RIGHT AND A LOT OF THINGS WERE
DELIVERED AND THEN WE GOT A NEW
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL AND
SOMEBODY'S GOING TO USE THAT
KIND OF IN THE NEGATIVE OR THE
POSITIVE IF WE HAVE.
SO I'M JUST THINKING ABOUT HOW
THIS BECOMES OPERATIONALIZED
ONCE IT'S PUBLISHED.
SO YOU KNOW, I KNOW I'LL GET TO
THIS A LITTLE BIT LATER BUT
LIKE THIS FIRST POINT WHAT WE
SHOULD KIND OF FOCUS ON I'D
LIKE TO GET A LITTLE BIT THE
ONLY THING THAT I HAVE IS I
WANT CONSISTENCY AND WHETHER
IT'S UNITS OR BEDS, JUST THE
CONCEPT OF HOMES IS A LITTLE
DIFFICULT.
>> SO THAT'S MY FEEDBACK.
BUT I'D ALSO LIKE TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND FROM OTHER FOLKS
WHERE THEY STAND ON THE
SPECIFICITY OF 12 TO 18 HUNDRED
AND HOW IT GETS UP
OPERATIONALIZE WHEN PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING AT IT SAYING OH WELL
YOU HIT THE TARGET.
OH SO DO I NOT BRING THIS
FORWARD KIND OF A THOUGHT
PROCESS SO I COULD JUMP IN
THERE?
>> YEAH, I THINK PART OF WHAT'S
MISSING IS WE DON'T HAVE A CITY
COUNCIL OR A FRAMEWORK.
WE DON'T HAVE A LIKE POPULATION
.
WE ARE REACTING TO THE MARKET
AND SO CURRENTLY WE ARE BEHIND
THE MARKET BECAUSE WE ARE SHORT
ON HOUSING UNITS.
PEOPLE PUT IT SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
SEVENTY FIVE HUNDRED AND TEN
THOUSAND.
SO IF WE HIT THAT GOAL THEN DO
WE STOP DEVELOPING AND I THINK
THE ANSWER TO THAT IS NO.
SO ABSENT A ACTUAL POPULATION
TARGET THAT WE'D LIKE TO SEE
THE CITY DO WE WANT TO SEE THE
CITY DOUBLED?
THIS IS A THIRTY FORTY FIFTY
YEAR LOOK AHEAD AT THE CITY AND
I AGAIN JUST REMIND THE
COMMISSION IN 1970 THEY WERE
DISCUSSING THE CITY WITHIN TEN
YEARS GROWING TO ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY THOUSAND WHEREVER IT
WAS AT THAT TIME IT WAS UNDER A
HUNDRED THOUSAND AND THEY NEVER
ACHIEVED THAT.
AND WE KNOW SOMEWHERE IN THE
70S WE HAVE SOME CONSTRAINT
THAT PREVENTS US FROM ACTUALLY
GETTING ABOVE ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THOUSAND.
SO AS WE THINK ABOUT SO THAT
WAS PART OF WHY I PERSONALLY
WANTED TO STRIKE ALL OF THIS
BECAUSE I FELT LIKE IT LACKED A
TIGHT END TO A LARGER GOAL THAT
WE COULD SEE HOW THIS IS
CONTRIBUTING TO.
AND SO ABSENT THAT AGAIN I WILL
GO BACK TO THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DOCUMENT TO SEE IF
MR FOURNIER HAD ANYTHING ABOUT
POPULATION GROWTH.
I KNOW HE HAS SOMETHING IN
THERE ABOUT UNIT NEED AND SO
TRY TO ALIGN THOSE TWO THINGS
WOULD BE SORT OF MY COOKOFF FOR
THAT PART.
THE DISCUSSION.
>> SO MY INTERPRETATION OF THIS
IS IT ALIGNS WITH OUR GOAL
OF TRYING TO IDENTIFY RIGHT.
WE'RE TRYING TO DOUBLE OR
TRIPLE THE AMOUNT THAT WE
CURRENT OUR CURRENT HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT IS BUT I CAN SEE
THAT THAT ALSO MAYBE DOESN'T
GET AT WHAT WE WANT IS THE NEXT
BULLET POINT IS THE DIVERSITY
OF HOUSING TYPES.
RIGHT?
WE DON'T NECESSARILY WANT
TWELVE HUNDRED OF THE SAME
EXACT UNIT BEING BUILT SO THOSE
COULD BE TIED TOGETHER.
THERE WERE ALSO COMMENTS IN
HERE ABOUT HOW MAYBE VACANCY
RATE IS A BETTER METRIC.
>> YES, THERE'S A FEW PEOPLE
WHO COMMENTED ON THAT AND SO IF
WE DO GO THIS ROUTE WHERE WE
WANT TO BE MORE SPECIFIC AND
PUT THESE UNDER OUR GOALS, YOU
KNOW, THEN WE'D HAVE TO FIGURE
OUT WE COULD HAVE A HEALTHY
VACANCY RATE WHICH WE CURRENTLY
DO NOT HAVE.
SO THAT COULD ONCE WE ACHIEVE
THAT THEN IT'S LIKE OH NOW
WE'RE FINALLY WHERE WE NEED TO
BE.
SO AND WE HEARD THAT LAST WHEN
WE WERE DISCUSSING THIS.
I ALSO NOTICED IN THE QUESTIONS
FROM STAFF THAT WAS THAT OUR
PACKET A COMMENT THAT THESE
NUMBERS APPROXIMATELY TWO TO
THREE TIMES THE CITY'S CURRENT
ANNUAL PRODUCTION.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S HELPFUL
TO SAY SOMETHING LIKE DOUBLE
THE NUMBER OF UNITS THAT ARE
BEING BUILT HERE OR SOMETHING
LIKE I THINK I DON'T LIKE THE
TOTAL GENERALITY OF INCREASE
LIKE BY ONE YOU KNOW, SO
SOMETHING WHICH IS ASPIRATIONAL
BUT THAT IS
THERE'S SOMETHING
ODD ABOUT THE TWELVE HUNDRED
EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND THE TWENTY
FIVE YEARS FOR ME.
>> YEAH I JUST I, I DON'T MIND
THE SPECIFICITY.
I THINK IF WE'RE GOING TO BE
SPECIFIC WE SHOULD BE SPECIFIC
LIKE MOST OF THOSE OTHER
BULLETS ARE JUST INCREASE AND
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO GO FOR
ONE.
DOES IT MAKE SENSE OR NO TARGET
FOR ONE LIKE DOES IT MAKE SENSE
TO HAVE THEM FOR OTHERS?
I THINK THE REASON I JUST I
DIDN'T KNOW WHERE THEY CAME
FROM HEARING IT NOW I'M LIKE I
MEAN IN ALIGNED WITH THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LIKE ALL
THE BETTER IT WAS JUST KIND
OF A GOOD NUMBER THROWN OUT SO
MOTIVE OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
BUT I I LIKE THE SPECIFICITY.
I WOULD LIKE A LITTLE MORE
SPECIFICITY IF POSSIBLE IN SOME
OF THE OTHER THINGS I JUST I
TOTALLY GET IT LIKE THERE'S
SOME SPECIFICITY HERE AND
THERE'S SOME GENERALITIES BUT
IT THIS BOARD HAS BEEN
EXTREMELY FOCUSED ON HOUSING AS
THE PREDOMINANT ASPECT OF IT.
IT'S A THREAD THAT'S GUIDING A
LOT OF YOUR CONVERSATIONS
AROUND THIS DOCUMENT AND SO I
DON'T THINK IT'S INAPPROPRIATE
TO DELVE INTO MORE SPECIFIC
SPECIFICS WITH THAT WITH
HOUSING THEN YOU MIGHT APPLY
BROADLY ACROSS THE WHOLE
DOCUMENT.
SO I WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
OUT THERE THERE'S SOME
GENERALITIES HERE BUT I THINK
ALSO IF YOU THINK HOUSING IS
THE MOST IMPORTANT FEATURE
OF THIS PLAN AND I DON'T THINK
IT'S INAPPROPRIATE TO DOVE IN
WITH MORE SPECIFICITY TO THAT
AND MAYBE TAKING THE OBJECTIVES
OUT OF THE BOX WILL HELP
BECAUSE LOOKING AT THEM LIKE
THIS, IT'S JUST LIKE OK, WE A
VERY SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE AND AN
INCREDIBLY VAGUE OBJECTIVE
RIGHT BELOW IT.
>> YEAH, I FEEL CLEAR THE
DIRECTION ON THIS BUT THE ONLY
ADDITIONAL THING THAT IS GOING
TO ADD AND I DON'T THINK I
PICKED IT UP LATER ON IS
HOUSING IS IMPORTANT AND
SUSTAINABILITY IS IMPORTANT IN
THOSE TWO THINGS ARE LINKED AND
JUST THE LAST BULLET THAT TALKS
ABOUT REDUCE VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED I FEEL LIKE IF WE IF
PART OF WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO
HERE IS INCORPORATE A TWO ZERO
THAT THERE IS SPECIFICITY IN
THAT ONE TOO.
AND SO THERE COULD BE AND I
THINK THAT WE GET AT SOME
OF THAT BUT ACTUALLY I THINK
THAT IT'S A LOT VAGUER TO BE
REAL HONEST ON THIS ON THE
SUSTAINABILITY THINGS EVEN
RELATED TO MORE OR EVEN RELATED
TO TRANSPORTATION IF YOU TRAVEL
WHICH WE HAVE ANOTHER DOCUMENT
IN OUR GOAL BUT HAS A WHOLE LOT
SO WHICH ISN'T WHICH ISN'T
GOING AWAY RIGHT NOW.
>> SO MAYBE THAT'S WHY I
REFERENCED THAT OR THE FACT
THAT IT'S IN THERE I THINK
HELPS GIVE IT SOME PARITY LIKE
THAT.
>> WE'RE NOT OF ONE YOU KNOW,
LIKE SOLELY FOCUSED.
HEY, BY THE WAY, REMEMBER THIS
IS ALSO PART OF A COMPREHENSIVE
BECAUSE I DO THINK THAT THE
GUIDING PRINCIPLES WERE
AFFORDABILITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY.
SO I WANT TO MAKE THAT PART
CLEAR AS WELL IF I RECALL
CORRECTLY WAS 50 PERCENT
REDUCTION OF SINGLE OCCUPANT
VEHICLES.
>> MILES TRAVELED AN EIGHT TO
ZERO.
WELL, THAT'S WHAT WAS GOING TO
ASK IF YOU'RE REFERRING TO BE
MORE SPECIFIC LIKE YOU WOULD
LIKE TO SEE IT SAVE REDUCE
VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED BY 50
PERCENT IN ALIGNMENT WITH IN IN
ALIGNMENT WITH A TO ZERO OR
SOMETHING SOME LEVEL OF A
REFERENCE SO THAT IT WAS MORE
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO SOLVE ALL
OF THIS BY NOT HAVING IT IN THE
SAME BOX.
IT WAS MORE THAT I THINK
OVERALL THERE'S MORE NUMBERS
ASSOCIATED WITH HOUSING IN THIS
THAN THERE ARE WITH A LOT
OF OTHER
MAYBE I'LL KEEP MY EYE
ON THEM TO THERE IS A GRAPHIC
ON PAGE 48 NOT TO MOVE US OFF
THE FIRST PAGE WHICH WE'VE BEEN
ON, YOU KNOW, FOR A LONG.
BUT I HAVE MORE TO SAY I'M PAID
FOR BUT I JUST MEAN THAT THIS
GRAPHIC ON PAGE FORTY EIGHT
THAT SHOWS REALLY HOW LOW OUR
HOUSING PRODUCTION IS NOW WHILE
THE PERSPECTIVE OF PEOPLE WHO
LIVE HERE NOW THEY FEEL AS
THOUGH THERE IS A MASSIVE
AMOUNT OF STUFF GOING ON BLAH
BLAH BUT I MEAN OUR PRODUCTION
IS AN EVEN HALF WHAT IT WAS IN
FROM NUMBERS BUT FROM 70 TO 79
YOU'RE RIGHT.
IT'S NOT EVEN HALF WHAT IT WAS
THEN WHICH IS OFF PEAK AND
WE'RE ON PACE TO NOT DEVELOP AS
MUCH AS WE DID LAST YEAR AS FAR
AS I CAN SEE.
AND SO I THINK THAT MIGHT HELP
ANCHOR SOME OF THE PROJECTIONS
.
IF WE WANT TO ACCOMPLISH THIS
THEN WE WOULD HAVE TO DEVELOP X
BUT IT WOULD DEPEND ON THE IT
WOULD DEPEND ON THE
INFRASTRUCTURE AND IT WOULD
DEPEND ON WHAT PEOPLE CAN
TOLERATE WHERE SO THERE'S
THERE'S THERE ARE SUPPORT FOR
THE STATEMENTS THAT ARE BEING
MADE, THE SPECIFIC STATEMENTS
THAT WILL BE MADE BUT IT'S NOT
TOGETHER WITH THE STATEMENTS
AND IT HELPS COMPLICATE THE
PICTURE THAT PEOPLE HAVE.
>> AND REALLY QUICK FOR THE
FOLKS JOINING US, WE'VE BEEN
STARTING THE MEETINGS ACTUALLY
AT FIVE THIRTY BECAUSE OF THE
LENGTH OF PUBLIC COMMENT OH
HERE.
OH GOTCHA.
OH OK.
>> YEAH BUT OH GOTCHA.
SO I CAN'T NECESSARILY SPEAK
FOR THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
I APOLOGIZE.
>> IT WAS I THINK IT WAS
BECAUSE IN THE LIKE THE
PREVIOUS WEEKS WHEN WE WOULD
START AT SEVEN WE DIDN'T
ACTUALLY GET TO THE ACTUAL
MEETING UNTIL AROUND LIKE 10:00
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT AND SO
WE COLLECTIVELY MADE A DECISION
AND TO SAY THAT WE'RE GOING TO
MEET MORE FREQUENTLY AND START
THE MEETINGS AT FIVE THIRTY SO
WE COULD GRAPPLE WITH IT A
LITTLE BIT MORE SUBSTANTIVELY.
>> SO I JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU
A HEADS UP ON THAT THE
DISCUSSION OF CHANGING UP WORLD
WE'RE LITERALLY IN IT RIGHT NOW
AND YOU'LL ALSO HAVE A CHANCE
TO HAVE A PUBLIC COMMENT AFTER
OUR DISCUSSION.
SO NO PROBLEM AND THANK YOU AND
WELCOME FOR COMING UP.
THANK YOU FOR COMING.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE CURRENTLY MICHEL, BRING
US BACK TO PHILLY.
>> YOU CAN SEE THE BULLET
POINTS UNDER HOUSING TARGETS.
I THINK WE'VE COVERED THAT
THESE ONES BENEATH THAT ARE
ALSO REFERRING TO THE
OBJECTIVES IN THAT BOX.
SO I THINK THAT'S CLEAR TO ME
WHAT TO DO NEXT.
THERE.
BUT I THINK COMMISSIONER
APRON'S HAD A COMMENT ABOUT
PAGE FORTY SEVEN WELL I LOST
TRACK THAT WE WERE ON THIS SO
FIRST ON PAGE TWO WE CAN DO THE
MILLAGE.
DID YOU WANT TO DO THE MILLION
.
>> THAT'S WHAT I WAS GOING TO
ASK NEXT.
OH YEAH GO AHEAD.
YOU GOT YOUR COMMENT.
I THOUGHT YOU HAD A COMMENT
ABOUT THAT.
I'M ON PAGE THREE.
OH OK.
SORRY SO THE MILEAGE IS IN THE
OBJECTIVE BOX AND SO YES WE CAN
MAKE THE RECOMMENDATIONS THAT
YOU'VE SAID BUT THERE WERE SOME
THAT WERE ASKING WHY IS THIS
EVEN IN THE OBJECTIVES BOX IF
YOU WANT TO GO UP IT SAYS IS AN
INCREASED MILEAGE IN OBJECTIVE.
SO THAT'S THE SECOND TO NO
THAT'S THE THIRD TO LAST BULLET
POINT.
SO THAT WAS I THINK AS I'M
LOOKING CONFUSION ON MY PART
OF IT'S MILEAGE REVENUE NOT
INCREASING MILEAGES RIGHT.
AS THE OBJECTIVE OF IT'S THE
INCREASED MILEAGE REVENUE WOULD
BE THE OBJECTIVES OF ALONG WITH
THE TAX RATE AS BECAUSE IT IS
WELL THAT'S WHAT I WROTE IT SO
THAT'S WHY I SUGGESTED BUT I
THINK THEY MEANT BUT I DON'T
KNOW I'M GLAD I WASN'T THE ONLY
ONE.
I DON'T THINK IT'S GOING TO
INCREASE THE VILLAGES THEY
SHOULD REVISE.
>> CAN I TAKE THE REWORDING
THAT'S OFFERED HERE ON THE
FIRST BULLET POINT?
YES.
YEAH OK OK SO FORTY SEVEN NOW I
THINK WE'LL MOVE TO THAT THE
BLUEBOX SO THAT WAS I WANTED TO
JUMP IN.
YEAH YEAH I HAVE SO MANY ISSUES
WITH THIS BLUEBOX WITH OTHERS
AS IN OTHERS MAYBE I DON'T HAVE
TO GO THROUGH IT ALL I GUESS
MAYBE BEFORE I KIND OF PICK IT
APART I THINK THERE'S A
QUESTION ON THE TABLE ABOUT
REMOVING IT.
UM THAT MAY HAVE BEEN A
SUGGESTION.
UM I THINK THAT THIS BOX IS
JUST MEANT TO SHOW THAT WE ARE
NOT LIKE THE PIONEERS OF THIS.
WE ARE FOLLOWING A WAVE THAT'S
GOING ACROSS THE US ABOUT HOW
TO SET PROVIDE GENTLE DENSITY
AND FOR IMMIGRANTS.
BUT WHAT'S INTERESTING IS THAT
IT'S BEEN SUCCESSFUL SOME
OF THE IN SOME OF THESE
COMMUNITIES AND SOME OF THESE
COMMUNITIES ACTUALLY HASN'T
BEEN SUCCESSFUL.
SO I THINK THAT'S ONE QUESTION
THAT I HAVE.
AND THEN I THINK THE OTHER
QUESTION THAT I YES.
ITS INTENTION IS A LITTLE BIT
UNCLEAR TO ME LIKE WHETHER
THESE ARE MEANT TO PEOPLE WE
WANT COMMUNITIES WE WANT TO
MODEL OURSELVES AFTER OR
CAUTIONARY TALES AND MAKE THAT
WE ARE GOING TO KEEP.
BUT I THINK WE NEED TO BE MUCH
MORE CLEAR ABOUT WHAT WHAT
HAPPENED IN THESE COMMUNITIES
OR EVEN I DON'T MEAN JUST
MOBILE PHONES AND LIKE HOW DOES
PORTLAND FIND AFFORDABLE HOW TO
SEATTLE TO FIND AFFORDABLE RIDE
WITH THE INTERNATIONAL
RESIDENTIAL CODE ?
>> THE A BUILDING FORM CONTROL
AS THEY SAY, WHICH ALSO IS A
PLACE JUST A COUPLE OF TIMES
AND IT'S A TERM I'M FAMILIAR
WITH I THINK THEY MEAN FOR BASE
CODE .
>> WELL, I THINK HERE THEY'RE
TALKING ABOUT DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS WHEN THEY SAY
BUILDING CODE AND BECAUSE THEY
TALK ABOUT HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
AND SETBACKS SO THAT I WOULD
SAY BUT THEY ALSO SAY YEAH, SO
THEN LET'S USE THAT TERM OR
MAYBE OTHERS ARE FAMILIAR THAT
I'VE NEVER HEARD OF BUILDING
FORM CONTROLS AS
OF AS A PHRASE
I MEAN TO BE FAIR I DON'T THINK
EITHER WILL BE CLEAR TO THE
PUBLIC LIKE DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS.
I DON'T KNOW IF THIS IS BETTER
BUT WE CAN PUT THAT IN LANGUAGE
YOU COULD SAY LIMITING
DIMENSIONS SUCH AS HEIGHT.
OK, WELL YOU COULD EVEN DO
THAT.
IT'S HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
YOU COULD JUST STRIKE OUT AND
JUST SAY HEIGHT RESTRICTION.
>> I THINK THIS BOX AND YOU CAN
CORRECT ME I MEAN YOU'RE SO
YOU'RE STATING THAT THESE HAVE
NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL.
I THINK THAT THEIR PERSPECTIVE
AND OURS IS THAT MAYBE SOME
OF THESE COMMUNITIES IT'S TOO
EARLY TO TELL IF THEY HAVE OR
HAVEN'T BECAUSE THESE HAVE BEEN
PASSED IN THE LAST YES.
>> I SAW SOMEBODY SAY LIKE I
HAVE OTHER COMMUNITIES
ATTEMPTED TO ADD HOUSING OR I
GUESS IT PRESENTS AS IF THESE
THINGS LED TO REAL
TRANSFORMATION IN NEIGHBORHOODS
WHICH IN MINNEAPOLIS IT HAS NOT
YET WE CANNOT BE YET THERE I
WAS GOING TO ATTEMPT TO BECAUSE
NOW YOU'RE SIGNALING IT DIDN'T
WORK.
YEAH.
AND IF I WERE DOING I THINK IT
IS ADDRESSED HOUSING NEEDS
THEY'RE DOING THESE THINGS IN
AN ATTEMPT TO ADDRESS HOUSING.
YEAH WE CAN BUT I'M SAYING I
DON'T WANT TO CLAIM THAT THESE
ARE BUT THIS IS A LIST OF FOUR
MISSING SOLUTIONS THAT HAPPENED
IN THESE OTHER COMMUNITIES AND
THEN I REALLY DON'T LIKE THIS
AFTER THE BOTTOM.
I THINK SOMEBODY SUGGESTED A
NICE WAY TO REWRITE
UNDER
THIRTY FIVE FEET EIGHT PAGE
FORTY SEVEN THIS LACK OF SECOND
DURING THE ENGAGEMENT PROCESS
THE PLANNING TEAM SHOWED THE
COMMUNITY ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
GENTLEMEN CITY AND RECEIVED
POSITIVE FEEDBACK FROM THE
COMMUNITY FOR FOUR UNITS.
I THINK THAT'S A MUCH BETTER
WAY TO WORD IT IF WE ARE GOING
TO KEEP IT I WOULD STRIKE IT
ALL TOGETHER BUT GO BACK TO THE
BOX THIS BOX DOESN'T HAVE TO BE
HERE.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BASE YOUR
LANDY'S POLICIES ON WHAT AND
THAT'S THAT'S KIND OF YEAH I
WOULD ACTUALLY SAY THAT WE
SHOULD STRIKE IT BECAUSE
THEY'RE DIFFERENT POPULATIONS.
THEY'RE DIFFERENT CONTEXTS.
AND SO AGAIN, LIKE MY THOUGHT
PROCESSES HOW IS LIKE THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN GOING TO BE
OPERATIONALIZED WHEN PEOPLE ARE
READING IT THEY GET TWENTY
YEARS ON THE ROAD RIGHT.
THEY'RE LIKE OH LOOK AT
MINNEAPOLIS.
I WONDER WHY THIS IS HERE.
IS IT PERTINENT OR RELEVANT?
I MEAN IT'S GOOD THAT WE'VE
DONE THE RESEARCH AND THE CASE
STUDIES.
I JUST DON'T THINK THAT HAS
GRAVITAS OR RELEVANCE LONGEVITY
INTO THE FUTURE.
SO I WOULD ACTUALLY THINK THAT
IT'S BETTER TO JUST STRIKE THIS
ENTIRE AGAIN WE WANT TO TALK
ABOUT HOW WE MAKE IT MORE
ACCESSIBLE NOT YOU KNOW, HAVE
PEOPLE ASK WHAT IS THE
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL
CODE ?
WHY IS IT MENTIONED CURRENTLY
IN OUR PLAN?
>> SO DO WE WANT TO TAKE A VOTE
ON THIS?
YEAH, TYPICALLY YEAH.
I WANT TO I THINK I'D BE HAPPY
TO DO A STRAW POLL ABOUT JUST
REDACTING THIS BOX.
I MEAN I CAN SEE HAVING CERTAIN
SOMETHING THAT'S NOT TIED TO A
CITY OF LIKE WAYS THAT
COMMUNITIES WOULD ADD HOUSING
TO SINGLE FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS
THAT ARE OPTIONS.
BUT I AGREE THAT THIS IS SORT
OF LIKE THESE ARE FOUR BIG
CITIES AND I DON'T THINK TEN
YEARS DOWN THE ROAD OR FIFTEEN
YEARS DOWN THE ROAD.
WELL, WE WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
SITUATION IS GOING TO BE WITH
THESE.
>> I THINK IT'S IT'S REALLY
GOOD TO LOOK AT THESE AND SEE
WHAT OTHER PLACES ARE DOING BUT
I'M NOT SURE WHAT IT WHY IT
BELONGS IN OUR BUT I COULD SEE
SORT OF OPTIONS TO SAY THERE
ARE THERE ARE DIFFERENT WAYS
OF DOING THIS.
YEAH.
BUT IT KIND OF FEEDS INTO THE
POINT THAT I WANTED TO MAKE
BLEEDING INTO THE NEXT PAGE
WHICH IS WE ARE NOT UNIQUE IN
THIS CITY IN HAVING AN
AFFORDABLE HOUSING CRISIS.
IT'S A NATIONAL PROBLEM.
SOME PLACES IT'S WORSE THAN
OTHERS IT'S PARTICULARLY
PROBLEMATIC DESIRABLE CITIES
LIKE ANN ARBOR WHERE A LOT
OF PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE.
WE'RE NOT UNIQUE AND STRUGGLING
TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO ADDRESS IT
.
THERE'S GOOD SCHOLARSHIP OUT
THERE SHOWING THAT ADDING
BEFORE ADDING MORE UNITS.
WELL, FIRST OF ALL, IT MAKES
CLEAR NOTHING'S GOING TO HAPPEN
OVERNIGHT.
>> THERE'S NO POLICY CHANGE
THAT WE CAN MAKE THAT'S GOING
TO HAVE AN IMMEDIATE EFFECT.
BUT ADDING MORE HOUSING HAS THE
EFFECT OF IF NOT REDUCING
HOUSING PRICES AT LEAST SLOWING
THE INCREASE IN THE RISE.
THERE'S GOOD SCHOLARSHIP OUT
THERE TO SHOW THAT THERE'S A
TON OF MATERIAL THAT THE
MICHIGAN ASSOCIATION
OF PLANNING HAS PRODUCED.
ALL OF THESE DIFFERENT METHODS
HAVE BEEN SUGGESTED.
THEY'VE BEEN VETTED.
THERE'S A LOT OF WORK THAT'S
BEEN DONE TO SAY THESE ARE GOOD
THINGS TO TRY AND DO TO SOLVE
THESE PROBLEMS.
NONE OF THAT IS CITED IN HERE
THAT I CAN SEE AND I'M MISSING
IT.
YEAH, I THINK WE COULD AND
WE'RE HEARING FROM FOLKS SAYING
THERE'S NO EVIDENCE BEHIND
THIS.
WELL, THEY'RE KIND OF RIGHT
THERE.
WHAT IT SAYS IS HERE'S WHAT WE
HEARD FROM THE OUTREACH EFFORTS
AND THEN THERE'S SOME BIG
STATEMENTS WITH SOME PRETTY
WELL EXPLICATED JUSTIFICATIONS
I THINK WE COULD DO A LOT
BETTER TO PROVIDE THE FACTUAL
BACKGROUND TO SUPPORT THE KINDS
OF POLICIES WE ARE PROMOTING IN
THE BORDER, JUSTIFY THE GOALS
IN THE AND THINGS WE'RE DOING
AND I THINK IT'S USEFUL EVERY
TIME I GO TALK TO A COMMUNITY
THEY WANT TO KNOW WHAT ARE THE
OTHER COMMUNITIES DOING?
I MEAN IT IS HELPFUL TO KNOW
HOW ARE OTHER COMMUNITIES
ADDRESSING THESE PROBLEMS?
I DON'T KNOW THAT I WANT TO
JETTISON COMPLETELY
INAPPROPRIATE AND UNIQUE.
YES, BUT WE'RE NOT THAT UNIQUE.
I MEAN THERE ARE OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE HAD
EXPERIENCES THAT WE CAN LEARN
FROM.
MAYBE WE DON'T HIGHLIGHT IT
QUITE THIS WAY.
SO I'M OK WITH JUST IN THE BOX
AND THE WAY IT'S PRESENTED BUT
I WOULDN'T WANT TO SAY LET'S
NOT TALK ABOUT WHAT ANY OTHER
CITY HAS DONE.
SURE.
OK, THERE WAS MY LITTLE SOAPBOX
I PLEASE I MEAN THERE'S GOOD
MATERIAL THAT IS PRODUCED AND
GOOD STUDIES THAT THEY'RE
RELYING ON THAT WE COULD DO A
BETTER JOB OF OF BEEFING UP THE
EXPLANATION WHY THIS IS SUCH A
PROBLEM AND WHY THE STEPS THAT
WE'RE PROPOSING MAKES SENSE.
I'M LET'S GO TO THE VOTE.
I JUST WANT TO SAY THAT LIKE WE
DO GET ASKED POINTEDLY OF LIKE
IF PEOPLE ARE NOT READING UP
ABOUT PLANNING AS MOST ARE NOT
THEY THEY THINK THAT THIS IS
RADICAL WHAT WE ARE PROPOSING I
THINK THIS IS MEANT TO SHOW
THAT MANY OTHER COMMUNITIES ARE
ALSO DOING US.
>> SO ARE WE JUST DOING A STRAW
POLL ON STRIKING IT OR ARE WE
ENTERTAINING ALTERNATIVES TO I
WOULD SAY THAT THE VOTE WOULD
BE ON STRIKING IT OR NOT AND
THEN SOMEONE ELSE WOULD HAVE TO
COME BACK AND SAY HERE'S WHAT I
WOULD SUGGEST TO REPLACE.
>> WELL, I THINK MAYBE WHEN WE
GET TO THE RATIONALE WE CAN
TALK MORE ABOUT HOW WE'D LIKE
TO MAKE THE ARGUMENT SO WE KNOW
NO, I'M LOOKING AT YOU.
I MY SENSE IS FOLKS ARE
TROUBLED ENOUGH BY HOW THIS IS
PRESENTED.
IT'S NOT PRESENTED WELL.
IT'S RAISING MORE QUESTIONS
THAN IT'S ANSWERING.
>> SO MAYBE THE YOU KNOW,
STRIKE THE BOX.
DO YOU WANT TO LEAVE THE VOTE
THAT DOES ANYBODY WANT TO KEEP
THE BOX?
>> I MEAN I WOULD KEEP A
REVISED VERSION OF THE POST.
>> THAT'S WHAT I WAS GOING TO
GO I WOULD LEAN TOWARDS YOU.
COMMISSIONER NORTON, WHAT YOU
DID?
YES, THERE'S THE THE THE
MICHIGAN MAP.
THEY HAVE A TOOL KIT AND THEN
TOOL KIT.
THEY GO THROUGH ALL OF THE
DIFFERENT WAYS THAT YOU CAN
ACCELERATE HOUSING THAT YOU CAN
PUT HOUSING AT EVEN THE AARP
HAS A WHOLE SECTION ON THAT
WHICH IS ALSO RESEARCH IN
CITABLE.
SO WE COULD BRING THOSE THOSE
BITS INTO THIS BLUE BOX THAT
SAY HERE ARE HOW OTHER
COMMUNITIES HAVE ADDRESSED
THEIR HOUSING SHORTAGES.
THEY'VE DONE IT IN THIS WAY,
THIS WAY, THIS WAY AND THAT WAY
WE CAN EVEN KEEP SOME OF THE
REFERENCES TO THE CITIES JUST
TO SAY IN MINNEAPOLIS THEY DID
THIS IN AUSTIN THEY DID THAT.
BUT THE WAY THAT THIS IS
PRESENTED I HAD AN OBJECTION TO
IT BECAUSE I WAS LIKE OH, THIS
WAS THIS WAS MY ONE TIME WHERE
I WAS LIKE THIS IS CHERRY
PICKED PUT CAMBRIDGE IN.
>> THEY WENT TO FIVE FIVE
STORIES CITYWIDE SO SO WAS THE
NOTE REVISE THE BOX THAT WOULD
BE MY NOTE BUT THAT'S WHY I WAS
ASKING IF WE WERE TAKING A
STRAW POLL ON THE WHOLE THING.
I'M SEEING A LOT OF SUPPORT FOR
ELIMINATING A SINGLE COMMUNITY
REFERENCES THAT YOU'RE MORE
INTERESTED IN ACADEMIA
REFERENCES AND SUPPORT ABOUT
WHY THE TOOLS THAT
ORGANIZATIONS LIKE MAP ARE
REFERENCING ARE COMMON.
YOU'RE INTERESTED AS MUCH IN
THE COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE DONE
THAT AND REPORTING ON THEIR
DATA.
YOU'RE MORE INTERESTED IN THE
AGGREGATED RESEARCH TO SAY THAT
COMMUNITIES ARE INTERESTED IN
AFFORDABILITY SHOULD YOU
EXAGGERATE UNITS?
AARP SAYS THAT YOU'RE LESS
INTERESTED IN WHAT SAN DIEGO
HAS DONE THERE BECAUSE THEY
ALSO SAY TOWN HOMES.
THERE IS A WE'VE DONE TO USE OK
WHILE WE'RE IN THIS BOX THERE
WERE TWO THERE.
WELL, WE'RE GETTING RID OF OK
SO I DON'T NEED TO GO OVER
THIS.
THIRTY FIVE FEET THE ASTERISK
AT THE BOTTOM THAT'S GONE GREAT
KIND OF LIKE THAT SENTENCE IF
IT WERE TO GO IN SOMEWHERE ELSE
I DON'T KNOW.
I MEAN YOU CAN KEEP IT IF MAYBE
NOT THE BUT THAT I CAN I CAN
HAVE IT.
THANK YOU.
YOU CAME HELP TWO PEOPLE HAVE
THE WELL THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU'VE HAD THE SAME SENTENCE TO
MY OK SAME UM ARE WE GOOD TO
KEEP MOVING.
YES.
CAN WE MOVE TO THE MR. HOUSING
TARGETS.
THAT WAS A QUESTION OF OURS AND
ALSO RECEIVED MANY COMMENTS I
AM SKIPPING I AM SKIPPING SOME
OF THESE SO PLEASE IF YOU FEEL
LIKE YOU WOULD LIKE TO BRING UP
SOMETHING I'M SKIPPING YOU CAN
ALWAYS INTERJECT SO THAT MR.
HOUSING TARGETS WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT PAGE FORTY EIGHT
UNDERNEATH THAT PARAGRAPH UM
THAT SHOWS LIMITED SUPPLY OVER
TIME IT'S IN BOLD ON PAGE THREE
SO WE ASKED YOU HOW YOU ALL
FEEL ABOUT THAT REFERENCE AND
I'LL LET YOU TALK ABOUT IT NOW.
>> SORRY CAN I ASK
A GENERAL
QUESTION?
UM DO YOU THINK WE WENT INTO
THE GROCERY.
>> YES AND STARTED ONE I CAN
READ THE WORDS WHENEVER YOU
WANT MADE A REFERENCE TO
SOMETHING SHOULD BE YEAH WE
COULD JUST TAKE YOUR GIRLFRIEND
OUT OF HERE, PUT IT IN A GLASS
I THINK THAT'S GREAT.
I REALLY APPRECIATE THAT.
SURE.
SO I I'LL START ON FORTY CAN I
JUST BACK UP THE PREVIOUS
BULLET.
I KNOW YOU WANT US TO BE UNDER
THE GUN BUT MY ONLY CONCERN I
HAD WAS THE NUMBERS BEING
BOLDED AND ARE COMING OUT BUT
THE CITATIONS AREN'T THEY DON'T
SEEM TO FLOW SO THE SEVEN FIFTY
IS BOLDED BUT IT'S NOT CITED.
THE CITATION COMES AT THE END
OF THE WHOLE SENTENCE AND WHAT
IN PARTICULAR ARE WE TARGETING?
SO THAT WAS PART OF WHAT I SENT
IN WHICH IS JUST TO CLARIFY
THAT OR TO REMOVE THE RELIANCE
ON THESE NUMERICAL TARGETS
BECAUSE ORDER IS ALREADY
EXCEEDING WHAT THE STATE'S
GOALS ARE IF I UNDERSTOOD THAT
CORRECTLY SO I DIDN'T
UNDERSTAND WHY WE HAD TO INCUR
BACK INTO THIS UNLESS WE WERE
SAYING YES, WHICH IS FINE IF
IT'S A MOMENT TO SAY YES, I
THINK ONE THING THAT'S
HAPPENING IS THAT THE MICHIGAN
PLANNING ENABLING LEGISLATION
HAS BEEN MODIFIED TO REQUIRE A
REFERENCE TO HOUSING DEMAND AND
I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
REASONS THE STATE PUT OUT THIS
BECAUSE THEY RECOGNIZE IT'S
GOING TO BE CHALLENGING FOR A
LOT OF COMMUNITIES TO
COMMISSION THAT KIND OF WORK.
SO I YEAH, I STRUGGLE.
I JUST I THINK I RAISE THE
QUESTION IN THE CONTEXT BECAUSE
IT SEEMS THE NOTION THAT WE ARE
ALREADY EXCEEDING IT LARGELY
BUT WE ARE FACING THE
AFFORDABILITY ISSUES WE HAVE IT
DOESN'T SEEM LIKE A NORTH STAR
RIGHT.
>> SO THAT WAS THE QUESTION YOU
KNOW, I CAN APPRECIATE THE
CHALLENGE HERE AND THE SEVEN
HUNDRED AND FIFTY UNITS.
YES.
SHOULD BE CITED THAT CAME FROM
US THAT IS BASED ON CBO DATA.
RIGHT.
AND THAT WAS IN MY COMMENT AS
WELL BECAUSE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT PERMITTED HOUSING.
THAT'S IN THE PIPELINE.
SO IT'S NOT YET ALL BEEN SHOVEL
READY, RIGHT?
CORRECT.
YEAH.
SO THOSE ARE PROJECTS THAT ARE
EITHER APPROVED IN STAGNANT OR
IN THE PROCESS.
>> RIGHT.
CAN I ASK DO YOU HAVE A SENSE
WILL THEY ALL GO THROUGH OR
WILL SOME OF THEM FIZZLE?
>> HISTORY WOULD SAY THAT SOME
OF THEM WILL DEFINITELY FIZZLE
.
THAT WOULD BE SUCH A HUGE
ADDITION.
>> ARE YOU LOOKING AT THIS BAR
GRAPH?
IT'S A HUGE POP IN WHAT WE'VE
SEEN BEFORE.
>> YEAH, THAT'S IT.
AGGREGATE SENSE TWO THOUSAND ON
AVERAGE WE'RE ONLY DOING TWO
FIFTY IF THREE HUNDRED BUT
WE'RE HALFWAY THROUGH THE
DECADE.
>> YEAH WE WE ARE WE ARE
CONFUSED ABOUT THE WAY THESE
NUMBERS ARE BEING PRESENTED.
THEY JUST YEAH SO THE FIFTY
THREE HUNDRED UNITS IS AN
AGGREGATION OF SITE PLANNED
PROJECTS THAT HAVE BEEN
APPROVED OR IN PROCESS OVER
RECENT HISTORY THAT SAYS HERE
TWO THOUSAND EIGHTY TWO
THOUSAND TWENTY FOUR YEAH THE
SEVEN FIFTY IS AN AVERAGE
OF ALL OF THAT PIPELINE
OF UNITS HOW MANY ACTUALLY WERE
BUILT AND RECEIVED A
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY ON AN
ANNUAL BASIS.
>> SO WE APPROVE A LOT MORE
THAN GET GOODWILL ON A REGULAR
BASIS SO A LOT OF THEM LET WE
SAY THAT YEAH, MAYBE IT'S JUST
BEING EXPLICIT ABOUT THE TIME
OUT.
SORRY SORRY I'M I STRUGGLED A
LOT WITH THIS THAT FEELS LIKE
IT'S MIXING THINGS.
THE FIFTY THREE HUNDRED IS NOT
THAT'S OVER THE COURSE OF SIX
YEARS THAT IS NOT PER YEAR
CORRECT.
IT DOES SAY THAT YOU KNOW WHAT
I JUST HEARD WHAT I JUST HEARD
AND SO THIS IS WHAT I WANT TO
CORRECT I WANT TO MAKE SURE I
HEARD THINGS RIGHT.
IT'S NOT THAT WE'RE COMPARING
SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY PER
YEAR TO FIFTY THREE HUNDRED
TOTAL LIKE IN PER YEAR IF
ACTUALLY IF YOU TAKE SEVENTY
THREE FIFTY THREE HUNDRED AND
DIVIDED BY SIX BE CLOSE TO
THAT.
BUT YOU ALSO DON'T YOU'RE NOT
LIKE WAY UNDER YOUR LIKE TWENTY
PERCENT UNDER RATHER THAN LIKE
80 PERCENT UNDER WHICH WAS THE
KIND OF IMPLICATE THAT'S WHAT I
HEARD SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE LIKE CLOSE TO
IT.
>> WE KNOW THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF THINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION
TOO AND SO I FEEL LIKE THAT I
WOULD LOVE IF THERE WERE A
DOTTED LINE ON THE BAR ON THE
ON RIGHTMOST BAR TO SAY WHAT'S
ACTUALLY UNDER CONSTRUCTION
BECAUSE WE KNOW WHAT THOSE ARE
BECAUSE I WHAT I WASN'T SURE AS
WELL PARTICULARLY BECAUSE WE
HAVE THE FIFTY THREE HUNDRED
UNITS IN THE PIPELINE RIGHT
THERE SHOULD I ADD THAT TO THAT
BAR AND THEN WELL THEN WE DON'T
LOOK SO BAD AT ALL SO THERE
WERE WE CAN I KNOW WE CAN'T BUT
THAT'S WHAT IF I'M THE PUBLIC
THAT'S I'M GOING TO SAY LIKE
YES WE'RE ONLY SHOWING SEVEN
HUNDRED HERE LIKE YEAH THERE
WERE MORE QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
DATA ON THIS PAGE AS YOU CAN
SEE.
SO WE'RE GOING TO GO OVER ALL
THAT.
I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE DO
WE WANT THE THE REFERENCE TO
THE MICHIGAN HOUSING PLAN
REMOVE.
>> YES.
YES.
AND WHY WAS IT SUGGESTS THAT
WE'RE MEETING GOALS AND WE HAVE
A THREE PERCENT VACANCY RATE.
>> IT ALSO SUGGESTS IF WE WERE
GOING TO BUILD ANYTHING WE
SHOULD BE BUYING SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES AND THAT THAT SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES THAT MULTIFAMILY
HOMES ARE NOT FOR SINGLE
HOUSEHOLDS WHICH THEY ARE.
>> WE ARE GOSH.
SO IT WOULD SOUNDS LIKE YOU
FEEL LIKE THIS DATA IS NOT
SPECIFIC TO ANN ARBOR WITH IS
STATEMENT THAT IS WORDED JUST
THE WAY IT'S WORDED.
>> I MEAN I DON'T KNOW HOW WE
DO IT.
WE GET FOOTNOTED INSTEAD
OF PUTTING IN LINE TO SAY WHAT
YOU HAVE HERE AND ALL JUST DROP
IT DOWN LOW TO SAY THAT IT WAS
ALREADY EXCEEDING THE STATE
LEVEL GOALS IF YOU WANT IT IF
YOU FELT LIKE IT NEEDED TO STAY
AS A REFERENCE POINT.
BUT I JUST THINK FOR ME WHEN I
READ THROUGH THIS I WAS LIKE
WELL WE'RE ALREADY EXCEEDING
THE GOALS THAT WHAT IS THE WHAT
ARE WE DOING HERE?
AND OF COURSE WHAT WE'RE DOING
HERE IS TRYING TO MAKE MORE
HOUSING AVAILABLE FOR FOLKS SO
AND THE WAY THEY'RE PUT
TOGETHER IF YOU LIKE IT, IT'S
JUST BECAUSE IT'S CONTEXT.
RIGHT.
SO IF WE ARE GOING TO I THINK
IT'S THE POINT IS TO SAY
ACCORDING TO THIS HOUSING PLAN
WE'RE MEETING THE TARGET BUT WE
ACTUALLY UNDERSTAND THAT TO BE
INADEQUATE FOR THE OUR
COMMUNITY SPECIFICALLY WE
SHOULD JUST SEE WHY THAT IS.
WHY IS THAT WHY IS THE STATE
TARGET NOT APPROPRIATE FOR US
TO COMPARE OURSELVES TO?
SO IT'S NOT ABOUT HIDING
INFORMATION BUT I THINK IT'S
IT'S ABOUT NOT BEING CONFUSING
AND I THINK ON THE LEFT COLUMN
THE OTHER CONFUSING THING IS
THE CONTRAST BETWEEN SAYING
THAT ALL OF OUR GROWTH IS IN
STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS NOT IN NON
STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS BUT THE
DECLINE IN STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS
DOESN'T MEAN THAT WE'RE MEETING
DEMAND.
SO IT'S LIKE I TWIST MYSELF IN
NOT UNDERSTANDING WHAT WHAT'S
GOING ON.
SO MAYBE ONE THING ZOOM OUT AND
SAY WELL WHAT IS WHAT ARE WE
TRYING TO SAY HERE IN THESE KEY
CONSIDERATIONS AND THEN BACK
BACK INTO IT WITH MORE MORE
INTENTION OR SOMETHING?
>> YEAH.
SO WOULD YOU ALL SUPPORT
LEAVING THIS IN HERE IF WE
PROVIDE THE CONTEXT THAT JUST
ASKED FOR IS THAT A SOLUTION
THAT I WOULD NEED MORE ACTUAL
REFUTATION OF IT?
>> I THINK THE VERY DISTINCTION
BETWEEN TARGETS FOR SINGLE
FAMILY AND I DON'T EVEN KNOW IS
THAT DETACHED IS THAT WHATEVER
AND MULTIFAMILY I THINK IT'S A
TERRIBLE FRAMING AND IT'S
TOTALLY AT ODDS WITH OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS, YOU KNOW,
TO PRODUCE TO GROW.
I MEAN LOOK AT OUR MAP HERE.
IT SHOWS US HOW OUR PATTERN
OF GROWTH WAS AND THAT'S NOT
SUSTAINABLE ANYMORE IN THE
CITY.
SO I DON'T KNOW WHICH PARTS
OF MICHIGAN NEED OR CAN SUPPORT
A SINGLE FAMILY HOUSING
TARGETS.
BUT I DON'T THINK ANN ARBOR
DEPENDING ON WHAT THAT MEANS IS
IT DETACHED WHERE THE MINIMUM
SIZES I MEAN I FEEL LIKE THE
THE THE STATES TARGETS ARE
COMPLETE UNFATHOMABLE.
IT'S LIKE MEANINGLESS.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
>> SO I WILL SAY I MEAN THEY
USUALLY HIRE PEOPLE SO THEIR
METHODOLOGY IS NOT ALWAYS
SUPERB PUBLIC BUT I WILL SAY
HAVING SOME EXPERIENCE IN THIS
AREA THEY DO LOOK AT NUMBERS
AND THEY DON'T LOOK AT HOW
TYPICALLY LOOK AT LAND THAT'S
AVAILABLE.
RIGHT.
SO THEY CAN JUST GIVE YOU
NUMBERS LIKE THIS IS HOW MANY
UNITS YOU SHOULD HAVE WITHOUT
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT YOUR
JURISDICTION'S GOALS AND
AVAILABILITY OF LAND.
THEY'LL JUST SAY LIKE YOU
SHOULD HAVE THIRTY UNITS A YEAR
.
RIGHT.
BASED ON WHY I'M NOT
UNDERMINING THEIR PROCESS BASED
ON A METHODOLOGY THAT I I'M NOT
FAMILIAR WITH BUT YEAH, THIS IS
NOT NECESSARILY TAKING INTO
ACCOUNT WHAT WE HAVE AVAILABLE
FOR THESE AMOUNT OF UNITS.
UM SO I'M LOOKING FOR DIRECTION
THE QUESTION OF CONTEXT I DON'T
THINK CONTEXT IS ENOUGH.
I MEAN YES WE GET THESE FROM
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN BUT I
THINK JUST SAYING THESE TARGETS
DO NOT TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION
THAT A MAJORITY OF OUR HOUSING
SUPPLY IS ALREADY SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED HOMES THAT WE CANNOT
SUSTAIN ANY MORE SIGNIFICANT
AMOUNTS OF DEVELOPMENT LIKE
THAT AND I MEAN I JUST THINK WE
WOULD HAVE TO REFUTE THE
TARGETS TO KEEP THE LANGUAGE IN
AND I DON'T KNOW IF WE WANT TO
DO THAT.
WE THINK THE TARGETS ARE
MINIMUMS TO THERE.
YOU SHOULD BE TRYING TO GET TO
THIS MONEY.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT YOU CAN'T
YOU HAVE TO STOP WHEN YOU GET
THERE.
>> I GET THAT BUT I REALLY,
REALLY AM.
>> I MEAN WELL THE THE POINT I
WAS GOING TO IS YOU KNOW, THIS
MIGHT BE A PLACE THAT ACTUALLY
DOES MERIT A SIDE BOX
.
HERE'S THE STATE HOUSING
POLICY.
HERE'S HOW THEY DERIVED IT.
>> HERE'S HOW IT WORKS.
HERE'S WHY IT DOESN'T APPLY
HERE BECAUSE PLEASE BECAUSE I'M
GOING TO CUT A HOLE CHAPTER
HERE.
SO I GUESS MY VOTING GROUP IT'S
NOT IT'S NOT JUST IT IS BOTH AN
EMPIRICAL ISSUE AND A VALUES
ISSUE.
I FUNDAMENTALLY OBJECT TO THE
IMPLICATION THAT THAT THAT
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSEHOLDS ARE
BEST SERVED BY SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSING WHICH THIS DISTINCTION
MAKES THAT IMPLICATION.
>> YEAH, YOU HAVE TO SUPPORT I
THINK I WOULD NEED A VOTE
BECAUSE I'M NOT I'M NOT CLEAR
WHERE THE COMMISSION STANDS ON
THIS WHEN WE VOTE.
>> I DO HAVE A QUESTION I AM
STILL TRYING TO FIGURE OUT THE
NUMBERS IS THE FIFTY THREE
HUNDRED UNITS IN THE PIPELINE
OVER SIX YEARS CONSIST WITH
WHAT WE'VE BEEN SEEING FOR THE
SIX YEARS PRIOR TO THAT OR IS
THAT WHERE WE HAVE WHERE ARE
YOU SEEING ARE WE SEEING A BUMP
IN THE ACTIVITY THAT'S TAKING
PLACE AND IF SO IS THAT BECAUSE
OF THE ZONING CHANGES THAT HAVE
BEEN MADE OR WHAT WHAT CAN IT
WHAT CAN EXPLAIN THAT?
I DON'T KNOW THE COMPARISON TO
THE PREVIOUS SIX YEARS BECAUSE
WE DON'T HAVE THE AN EASY WAY
TO REPORT OUT THAT DATA SO THIS
MOST RECENT SIX YEARS HAS BEEN
DUE TO A LOT OF DATA MINING
THAT WE'VE BEEN TRYING TO WORK
ON.
I COULD DO THAT BUT I DON'T
HAVE THOSE NUMBERS NOW IT WOULD
BE HELPFUL RATHER THAN HONING
IN ON WHAT AN ABSTRACT NUMBER
THAT THE MICHIGAN HOUSING PLAN
IS CALLING FOR, I THINK IT
WOULD BE MORE HELPFUL FOR US.
I REALLY I THINK THIS GRAPH IS
TELLING A LOT ABOUT HOW OUR
PRODUCTION HAS DROPPED FALLEN
OFF DRAMATICALLY.
WHAT I'M TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
IS IS THAT ON AN UPSWING OR IS
IT ARE WE GOING TO STILL EXPECT
A WHOLE LOT OF HOMES NOT
GETTING FULLY REALIZED BECAUSE
THEY'RE FIZZLING FOR SOME
REASON?
WHAT SO I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
MORE WORK THAT IS FOR YOU TO
COLLECT THAT DATA AS SOON AS
YOU START PUTTING IT IN YOU
WANT TO REALLY HAVE A GOOD
THROW EXPLICATION OF DATA AND
THIS SEEMS JUST HALF BAKED TO
ME THIS COULD BE EXPANDED
GREATLY TO BETTER EXPLAIN
WHAT'S GOING ON HERE.
>> WHAT IS SOMETHING THAT YOU'D
LIKE TO SEE HERE?
WELL, THAT ACTUALLY BRINGS US I
MEAN SO WE GOT TO CIRCLE BACK
TO THIS BUT LIKE ALL OF THESE
BULLET POINTS HERE ON PAGE FOUR
ARE ALL OF THE ISSUES PEOPLE
HAVE WITH THE DATA THAT'S
PRESENTED ON THIS PAGE.
SO I DON'T KNOW MAYBE THIS NOW
CALLS FOR US TO WALK THROUGH
THESE ONE BY ONE BECAUSE YOU
CAN TELL US WHAT DATA WOULD BE
COMPELLING TO YOU OR PRESENTED
IN A DIFFERENT WAY.
SO I'M LOOKING AT PAGE FOUR.
IT SAYS DATA ON POPULATION AND
HOUSING GROWTH.
I THINK THE BIG DISCONNECT IS
PEOPLE WALK THROUGH THE CITY
SEEING HOUSING BEING
CONSTRUCTED.
IT'S THEREFORE THEY HAVE THEY
BELIEVE THAT THAT IS WHAT IS
HIDDEN IS WHEN THE GROWTH PUT
THERE THIRTY AFFORDABLE UNITS
INTO THE MARKET THEY HAD SEVEN
THOUSAND APPLICANTS.
>> THAT IS WHAT'S HIDDEN.
AND SO HOW BAD IS WHAT WE ARE
TRYING TO GO TOWARDS WHICH IS
HOW DO WE MAKE SPACE THROUGH
OUR LAND USE OVER THE NEXT 50
YEARS SO THAT THERE IS MORE
HOUSING PRODUCTION SO THAT WHEN
THIRTY UNITS GO ON THE MARKET
IT'S NOT BEING APPLIED FOR BY
SEVEN THOUSAND.
AND SO HOW DO WE REPRESENT THAT
IN A IN SORT OF COMPELLING WAY
I THINK IS WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO
SEE HERE BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE
THAT'S WHAT'S MISSING.
>> EVERYBODY WALKS DOWNTOWN,
THEY'RE EVERYTHING IS UNDER
DEVELOPMENT.
>> I CAN'T MOVE AROUND THE CITY
SO WHY DO WE MORE HOUSING?
>> I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY THE
ANSWER I'D LIKE TO SEE IN THE
DATA AND WHERE I WAS READING
THE DATA I WASN'T SURE WHAT
QUESTION WAS SUPPOSED TO BE
ANSWERING IN MY HEAD.
I'M SORRY MR. YES.
>> BEFORE WE MOVE ON I WANT TO
MAKE SURE WE FINISH THIS AHEAD
OF THE TWENTY TWENTY TWO
MICHIGAN HOUSE OF OK BECAUSE I
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE HAVE
CLARITY ON THAT BEFORE WE MOVE
ON.
WHAT I HEARD FROM MOST OF THE
FOLKS WAS THAT WHETHER IT'S AN
EXPOUNDING OR A CLARIFICATION
OF CONTEXT AS TO WHAT MR.
TARGETS ARE RIGHT.
THE MICHIGAN STATE OF MICHIGAN
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
HOW THEY DERIVE AND WHAT KIND
OF CONTEXT IT HAS.
>> SO MAYBE THE SENTENCE NEEDS
TO BE BLOWN UP.
THAT WAS A SUGGESTION I HEARD
FROM COMMISSIONER NORTON AND I
WOULD ACTUALLY BE SUPPORTIVE
OF THAT BUT WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE CONTEXTUALIZE THAT
PARTICULAR SENTENCE.
THAT'S WHAT I HEARD FROM MOST
PEOPLE.
NOT A SIMPLE REDACTION BUT AN
EXPLICATION.
>> THAT'S WHAT I HAVE HERE.
PERFECT.
AND THEN WITH RESPECT TO AND I
THINK IT WOULD BE HELPFUL TO
ACTUALLY GO THROUGH EACH ONE
OF THESE OVERALL THOUGH, THE
ONE COMMENT I WANTED TO MAKE
WAS ONE ON THIS CHART YOU SEE
EVERYTHING'S IN DECADES
NINETEEN EIGHTY TO EIGHTY NINE
TWENTY TEN TO TWENTY TWENTY.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S FAIR TO
PUT SINCE TWENTY TWENTY BECAUSE
IT LOOKS LIKE A SHARP DROP OFF
I WOULD ALMOST GET RID
OF TWENTY TWENTY RIGHT BECAUSE
WE HAVEN'T SEEN TWENTY TWENTY
TO TWENTY TWENTY NINE YET AND
SO I JUST DON'T WANT THERE TO
BE ANY KIND OF GRAPHICAL
REPRESENTATIONS THAT DON'T
REALLY TELL THE TRUE STORY
RIGHT.
ESPECIALLY IF YOU'RE GOING BY
DECADE AND THEN YOU'RE ONLY
SHOWING LIKE FOUR OR FIVE YEARS
OF TOVAN SO YEAH IT'S FROM THE
CENSUS SO IT'S IT'S SPA'S YEAH.
>> SO LIKE THE ANNUAL EACH YEAR
OF THE DECADE AVERAGED OR THE
TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL IN THE TOTAL
SO THAT'S WHAT I MEAN IT'S A
THREE HUNDRED SO THREE HUNDRED
SEVENTY UNITS ON AVERAGE
ANNUALLY IN THE LAST DECADE IT
WOULD BE I THINK THE CORRECT
INTERPRETATION SO I JUST WANT
TO MAKE SURE THAT I READ THE
ONE YEAR ESTIMATES.
>> YEAH BUT THAT IS JUST KIND
OF LIKE ONE THOUGHT I HAD REAL
QUICK BUT I THINK IT WILL BE
HELPFUL TO GO THROUGH EACH
OF THESE BULLET POINTS.
>> SO IF YOU WANT TO REMOVE
THAT ARE YOU'RE SAYING FROM
TWENTY TWENTY YEAH YEAH I JUST
I THINK IT MAKES IT SEEM LIKE
IT'S PRECIPITOUSLY DROPPING OFF
BUT IT'S NOT THE SAME TIME
PERIOD.
IT'S LIKE IT SHOULD EITHER BE
LIKE TWENTY TWENTY TO TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR ACTUAL WITH TWENTY
FIVE TO TWENTY NINE OR
SOMETHING SOME SOMETHING THAT
CREATES MORE CONSISTENCY THAT
SAYS THIS IS ALL THAT THE
DOTTED LINE YOU LIKE THAT IF
YOU DID WHAT COMMISSIONER MILLS
SAID ON TOP OF IT BUT IT MAY BE
WORTH EXPLAINING THAT THIS IS
LOOKING AT TOTAL UNITS OVER TEN
YEARS SOMEWHERE SO THAT PEOPLE
EITHER CAN DO MATH OR YOU CAN
GIVE THEM THE AVERAGE.
YEAH, BECAUSE I THINK PEOPLE
LOOK AT THIS AND GO OH WE'RE
BUILDING THIRTY THREE HUNDRED
UNITS OF HOUSING EVERY YEAR FOR
THE LAST TEN YEARS.
NO WE'RE BUILDING THREE HUNDRED
AND SEVENTY UNITS OF HOUSING A
YEAR OVER THE LAST TEN YEARS SO
SO THE TITLE COULD BE TOTAL
NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS BUT
DECADE AGO NOT BY YEAR BUILT
RIGHT.
AND THEN YOU COULD PUT IN THE
IT LINE THAT COMMISSIONER MILLS
SUGGESTED FOR THE FIVE THOUSAND
THAT'S THE PIPELINE THROUGH
TWENTY OR DO A PROJECTION.
I KNOW THE DATA DOESN'T EXIST
JUST YOU COULD DO YOUR BEST AND
PUT AN ASTERISK.
>> THIS IS OUR BEST ESTIMATE
OF WHAT WILL HAPPEN IN THIS
NEXT TEN YEARS AT OUR CURRENT
RATE IF I MIGHT I THOUGHT ABOUT
THIS ONE A LOT.
THIS DATA IS PULLED FROM THE
CENSUS.
SO THIS IS THE CURRENT LIKE THE
AGE OF THE CURRENT HOUSING
UNITS.
SO THIS IS NOT ACTUALLY WHAT
WAS BUILT IF SOMETHING WAS TORN
DOWN IT IS TAKEN OUT OF THIS SO
OVER TIME IF THAT MAKES SENSE
AND SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE UNDERSTAND HOW THIS
DATA IS THIS IS THAT SOME
PEOPLE GET A LONG VERSION
OF THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY
SURVEY WHERE YOU'RE ASKED WHAT
YOUR HOUSE WAS BUILT AND THAT'S
WHERE THIS COMES FROM AND SO IT
IS NOT WE PRESUMABLY WE HAD
MORE HOUSES BUILT, YOU KNOW, IN
THE 60S WHATEVER WHATEVER AGE
HOUSES ARE BEING TORN DOWN LIKE
THOSE TEARDOWNS ARE SUBTRACTING
OUT FROM THOSE COLUMNS.
>> SPIEGLER BEFORE WE GO
THROUGH EACH BULLET POINT, I
JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR SOME
OF THE COMMISSIONERS, UM, ONLY
SENT IN EDITS FOR HOUSING AND I
JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT
CHAPTER FOUR COVERS ALL THREE
WHOLE AREAS UM WHICH WE'RE
GOING TO TRY TO GET TO UM BUT
JUST YOU KNOW WE'RE NOT JUST
GOING THROUGH THESE TWELVE
PAGES OF HOUSING.
WE ARE GOING THROUGH 40 PAGES
DENHA I MEAN UM LET'S START
WITH THE FIRST BULLET POINT.
UM I DON'T HAVE THESE IN ORDER
OF BULLET POINTS SO IF YOU HAD
A COMMENT PLEASE SHARE YOUR
COMMENT PERSONALLY I JUST DON'T
REALLY UNDERSTAND THE LAST
SENTENCE.
THAT'S RIGHT.
LIKE A HOUSE THE FIRST BULLET
ONE THING I CAN TELL IS OLD
GROWTH THE SAME POPULATION
GROWTH OR WHAT ARE WE SAYING IN
THAT LAST PART I USED TO BEGIN
TO REPORT BUT THE GROWTH FASTER
THAN SO HOW GROWTH COULD BE 25
TO 50 PERCENT FASTER THAN
HOUSEHOLD GROWTH LIKE WHAT IS
HOUSEHOLD HOUSEHOLD STOCK
GROWTH.
THE UNITS I NOW KNOW THE PEOPLE
WANT A HOUSE OR PEOPLE.
YEAH.
WHERE ARE THEY GROWING FROM
JUST IN IN THIS ONE UNIT FOR
TWO TO THREE PEOPLE SO YOUR
POPULATION IN YOUR HOUSING GROW
AT DIFFERENT RATES LIKE SO MANY
GRADUATES WHO WANTS TO STAY
HERE FOR PERHAPS WE HAVE ON TO
LIVE THERE PAY REDUCE HOUSING
OR THERE'S SWITCHING FROM ONE
BEDROOM IF OTHER PEOPLE FIND
THAT CONFUSING, IF YOU CAN
CLARIFY IT, I CAN ALSO ASK WELL
ABOUT IT JUST LOOKING AT THE
SOURCE.
YEAH, YEAH.
NO THAT'S FROM MY CONSULTING.
WE'D HAVE TO GET CLARIFICATION
.
>> LOOKS LIKE THEY FOUND A
SOURCE THAT SHOWED WHAT A
HEALTHY HOUSING GROWTH RATE
WOULD BE.
SO CLARIFICATION ON THAT POINT.
OK, THANK YOU.
YES.
>> SECOND BULLET POINT ARE
THERE MORE QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE
FIRST BULLET POINT?
SO I HAD A QUESTION ON THE
SECOND BULLET POINT WHICH WAS
AT THE END IT SAYS AN OBVIOUS
POPULATION PLATEAU AROUND
NINETEEN EIGHTY IN THE LAST
FIFTY YEARS WASHINGTON COUNTY
HAS GROWN FIFTY.
I PRESENT A MUCH HIGHER RATE
THAN ANN ARBOR AT TWENTY FOUR
PERCENT BUT TWENTY FOUR PERCENT
GROWTH DOESN'T SEEM TO ME TO BE
A PLATEAU ALSO ON THAT POINT
THIS IS NOT PICKY BUT I
WOULDN'T SAY THE ISSUE IN ANN
ARBOR IS THAT POPULATION GROWTH
HAS BEEN POWERED UVM STUDENTS I
WOULD JUST ANN ARBOR AN ISSUE
OR DISABILITY ALTOGETHER YOU
CAN START THE TENT WITH
POPULATION THAT HAS BEEN
POWERED RECENTLY SOMETHING
ABOUT YOU KNOW AND THEN I
ALREADY SAID THIS COMMENT BUT I
THINK THERE'S SOMETHING
CONFUSING ABOUT IN THAT BULLET
POINT SAYING THAT STUDENT
GROWTH WITHOUT STUDENT GROWTH
HOUSEHOLDS HAVE DECLINED AND
THEN THE FOUNDLINGS EVEN THOUGH
THEY'VE DECLINED WE HAVE A LACK
OF IT SPEAKS TO THE NEGATIVE
EVEN THOUGH DECLINED.
IT DOES NOT MEAN THAT THERE IS
NO DEMAND FOR IT.
>> COULD YOU SAY THERE IS
DEMAND?
YEAH, I KIND OF REWROTE THAT
ONE.
THERE WAS KIND OF LIKE
REWRITING IT JUST A BIT
CONFUSING THE WAY IT'S AND I
THINK THAT THE DATA ON PAGE TEN
IN THE GRAPH ON PAGE 10 AND 11
SUGGESTS THE POPULATION THE NON
STUDENT POPULATION HAS NOT
DECLINED SO IS IN IN THE TIME
PERIOD IT'S GONE IT'S GONE UP
MUCH MORE SLOWLY THAN STUDENTS
BUT IT STILL HAS GONE UP.
>> SO I WAS REALLY CONFUSED BY
THAT.
THE RATE OF GROWTH IS IT'S NOT
YEAH IT'S NOT THE IMPURE
ABSOLUTE GROWTH.
YEAH OK.
IT'S THE PERCENTAGE THE THE WAY
THAT IT READS LIKE JUST IN
OTHER HOUSEHOLDS HAVE ACTUALLY
DECLINED IN RECENT YEARS LIKE
THE YEAH.
I DON'T YEAH.
WHICH IS YEAH WE TALKED ABOUT
THE FOURTH BULLET POINT THE I
GUESS I KIND OF WANT TO SPEAK
TO SOMETHING THERE'S A LOT
OF POPULAR SENTIMENT THAT WE
SHOULDN'T ALLOW ANY MORE GROWTH
BECAUSE WE DON'T WANT OUR
NEIGHBORHOODS TO CHANGE AND WE
CAN'T DO THAT.
WE LEGALLY CANNOT CLOSE THE
DOORS BEHIND US AND SAYING
NOBODY ELSE CAN MOVE TO ANN
ARBOR IF WE ATTEMPT TO DO THAT
WE WILL BE LITIGATED AND THAT
WILL BE STRUCK DOWN.
WE CAN'T DO THAT.
WE HAVE TO ACCOMMODATE THE
DEMAND.
THE SIGNAL THAT WE HAVE FOR
DEMAND IS THE FACT THAT SEVEN
THOUSAND PEOPLE ARE APPLYING
FOR A THIRTY THREE AFFORDABLE
HOMES.
>> WE HAVE TO TRUST THAT IT'S
PRETTY CLEAR THAT AT LEAST ONE
OF THE DRIVING FACTORS THAT'S
CONSTRAINING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
IS BECAUSE WE'VE WE'VE EXPANDED
HORIZONTAL THROUGH LOW DENSITY
DEVELOPMENT AND WE'VE NOW DON'T
HAVE UNLESS WE START BUILDING
UP WE CAN'T ACCOMMODATE THE
DEMAND THAT'S HERE.
WE HAVE TO START INTENSIFYING
AND BUILDING UP.
THE QUESTION IS HOW DO WE DO
THAT IN A WAY THAT IS LEAST
DISRUPTIVE AND MAINTAINS THE
CHARACTER OF THE COMMUNITY AS
POSSIBLE?
>> I DON'T THINK THE WAY THE
FACTS ARE LAID OUT AND WE'RE
SPENDING A LOT OF TIME ON THIS
BECAUSE THIS IS THE SECTION
THAT HAS GOT EVERYBODY
ANIMATING AND IT'S THE MOST
DIFFICULT THORNY ISSUE TO
DEBATE.
>> I THINK THIS WHOLE
DISCUSSION OF THE FACTS AND THE
PROCESSES AND THE PROBLEMS THAT
WE'RE FACING IS MUCH TOO
CURSORY AND NOT DEVELOPED WELL
ENOUGH.
I THINK IT NEEDS TO BE WRITTEN
AND BETTER EXPLAINED AND IT'S
WORTH TAKING THE TIME TO DO
THAT.
I THINK SO COMMISSIONER WHITE
PRESENTED SOME DATA THAT HE
THOUGHT WOULD BE COMPELLING.
IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE THAT
MISSING HERE?
>> SO IF IF WE THINK THAT WE
CAN TACKLE THE ISSUE LIKE
EXPLAIN THE ISSUES THAT WE'RE
FACING AND FACTS THAT SUPPORT
THAT, WHAT WOULD THOSE BE?
>> THE ONLY THING I WOULD ADD
IS JENNIFER HALL, HOUSING
COMMISSION DIRECTOR SAID THAT
WE HOUSE SOME PEOPLE OUTSIDE
OF THE CITY BECAUSE WE CANNOT
FIND AFFORDABLE UNITS INSIDE
THE CITY AND THAT WAS
SURPRISING TO ME.
I DID NOT KNOW THAT SO SO WELL
SO TO ME THAT THAT'S A HUGE
THAT'S A HUGE THING LIKE WE'RE
JUST HOW DO WE HOW DO WE
ADDRESS THAT AS A COMMUNITY
THAT THAT DOESN'T MAKE A LOT
OF SENSE.
>> I THINK THAT'S AN IMPORTANT
DISTINCTION THAT I THINK HAS
ALSO BEEN BROUGHT UP HERE THAT
WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT IN THE
PUBLIC BRINGS UP A LOT IS WE
NEED TO TALK ABOUT WHAT WE MEAN
BY AFFORDABLE.
>> YES.
SO WHEN WE SAY AFFORDABLE THIS
IS HOW I'VE BEEN EXPLAINING IT.
THERE ARE THERE IS THE HOUSING
COMMISSION AND THEY HELP TO
BUILD UNITS FOR PEOPLE THAT ARE
INCOME ELIGIBLE.
THOSE ARE SUBSIDIZED IN SOME
WAY WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
AFFORDABILITY WE DO HAVE GOALS
FOR THAT BUT WE ARE ALSO
TALKING ABOUT THE OTHER WORD
THAT IS USED IN PLANNING IS
ATTAINABLE TO MAKE HOUSING
ATTAINABLE AT DIFFERENT INCOME
LEVELS.
>> AND WE CAN TALK ABOUT AS A
GROUP HOW WE WANT TO EXPLAIN
THIS DISTINCTION TO THE PUBLIC
OR IN THIS DOCUMENT BECAUSE
WHAT YOU'RE BRINGING UP
COMMISSIONER WHICH JANE HALL
WORKS ON INCOME ELIGIBLE
HOUSING WHICH IS WHAT WE ARE
TALKING ABOUT SOME OF THE TIME
IN THIS DOCUMENT BUT NOT EVERY
SINGLE TIME AND I THINK THAT'S
BEEN A HUGE POINT OF CONFUSION.
>> IT IS A LOT OF BUT IT'S
BECOMING A STICKING POINT FOR A
LOT OF PEOPLE TO SAY BUILDING
MORE HOUSING DOESN'T MAKE IT
AFFORDABLE AND I KNOW THAT
AFFORDABILITY IS A GOAL BUT
DOING NOTHING ALSO DOESN'T MAKE
HOUSING AFFORDABLE.
SO IT IT'S WE HAVE TO DO
SOMETHING WE HAVE TO BE MOVING
IN A FORWARD MOTION, WHICH IS
WHY I APPRECIATE WHAT
COMMISSIONER NORTON HAD TO SAY
ABOUT THAT.
>> I DON'T I I DON'T KNOW IF I
WAS SPEAKING SPECIFICALLY TO
ANY POPULATION OR HOUSING BUT
THERE ARE THOSE TWO THINGS ARE
RELATED BECAUSE THE NATURE
OF ONE OF THE PROGRAMS THAT
THAT WAS INVESTMENT MANAGERS IS
THE HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
PROGRAM INHERENTLY THAT
PROVIDES PEOPLE THE CHOICE TO
TAKE A VOUCHER ISSUED BY THE
INTERIM HOUSING COMMISSION AND
USE IT ANYWHERE UM AMENABLE
HOUSING MIGHT NOT BE AT THE
LOWEST INCOME AVAILABILITY BUT
ATTAINABLE HOUSING IS A WAY
THAT A VOUCHER BECOMES VIABLE.
AND SO EVEN THOUGH THOSE
DEFINITIONS ARE DIFFERENT, I
THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO REALIZE
THAT THEY'RE THEY'RE RELATED.
JENNIFER JENNIFER AND HER TEAM
SUPPORT A LOT OF RESIDENTS
OUTSIDE THE CITY BECAUSE THOSE
VOUCHERS CAN'T AFFORD MORE
HOUSING WHEN THE COST IS LOWER
OUTSIDE THE CITY AT THAT THE
TAXPAYER KNOWS THAT GENERAL
TAXPAYER.
>> YEAH, WELL, WE'RE WE'RE ON
PAGE THREE OUT OF FORTY RIGHT
NOW AND WE'VE BEEN ON THIS FOR
A LITTLE RAGE FOR THANK YOU.
ALTHOUGH I OF THE CHAPTER ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT AND BECAUSE
ON THE NEXT PAGE FOR EXAMPLE
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY YOU
TALKED ABOUT THE AFFORDABLE
RENT AT TWENTY ONE EIGHTY WITH
AFFORDABLE MORTGAGE BEING TWO
HUNDRED SIXTY TWO THOUSAND.
I THINK WE CAN GET TO THAT AT
THAT PAGE AS OPPOSED TO
FOCUSING ON HOW WHAT WE MEAN AS
A 60 PERCENT 80 PERCENT ONE 20.
SO I'M ACTUALLY I I DID NOT GO
FOR IT AND I DID HAVE ANOTHER
KEY CONSIDERATIONS AND MAYBE
THIS IS PART OF THE CONFUSION
OF UM LIKE WHAT THESE ALL MEAN.
BUT SO FOR ME KEY
CONSIDERATIONS FOR HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT ARE ALSO
CONSTRAINTS ON DEVELOPABLE
DEVELOPABLE PROPERTY WHICH I
LIKE INCLUDING HISTORIC
DISTRICT UNIVERSITY OWNED LAND
PARK LAND HOUSES OF WORSHIP
THAT YOU KNOW THAT NOT
EVERYTHING IS DEVELOPABLE AND
AND I DON'T SEE THAT ANYWHERE
AND I DON'T KNOW MAYBE IT
DOESN'T MATTER BUT IT SEEMS
LIKE IT WOULD MATTER A LITTLE
BIT LIKE WE DON'T WE DON'T TALK
ABOUT THAT AT ALL AS WE SORT
OF SAY OH, EVERYTHING'S
AVAILABLE TO BUILD ON AND
THAT'S NOT TRUE.
THAT'S JUST FOR ME THAT SEEMS
TO ME LIKE A KEY CONSIDERATION
FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
>> OK, THE OTHER LEG WHAT MIGHT
BE INCLUDED IN KEY
CONSIDERATIONS IS THE IDEA AND
THE MAP ACTUALLY MAKES A GOOD
PLACE TO TALK ABOUT THIS THAT
OUR HOUSEHOLD SIZE HAS REDUCED.
SO THESE NEIGHBORHOODS WHEN WE
THE NEIGHBORHOODS THAT WERE
BUILT FOR THE FIFTIES, THEY
WERE BUILT FOR THE FAMILY SIZE
OF THE FIFTIES AND WE HAVE
FEWER PEOPLE IN EACH OF THOSE
HOUSES NOW THAN WE USED TO.
AND I THINK THAT THAT IS AND
THAT'S A KEY CONSIDERATION AS
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT THE
INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT THOSE
HOUSES LIKE THE PEOPLE IN THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS AND I FEEL LIKE
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT THAT WITH
ADIEUS THAT'S CLICKED FOR A LOT
OF A LOT OF FOLKS IN THOSE
THOSE LONGER ESTABLISHED
NEIGHBORHOODS AND SO THAT MIGHT
BE USEFUL TO BRING UP HERE.
AND IF WE THAT THAT COULD BE
DATA THAT WE COULD PULL
TOGETHER FINALLY THAT WE SHOULD
ADD SOME CITATIONS TO THAT
FINAL BULLET ABOUT ADDING
HOUSING HAS OTHER BENEFITS FOR
RESIDENTS AND ONE OF THEM IS
THAT HOUSING THIS GOES IN IN IN
HAND WITH WHAT COMMISSIONER
WHICH WAS SAYING ABOUT PEOPLE
BEING PUSHED OUTSIDE OF THE
CITY.
NEW HOUSEHOLDS IN ANN ARBOR
HAVE FEWER VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED JUST BY VIRTUE
OF BEING IN TEN OR TWENTY
MINUTE NEIGHBORHOOD.
AND SO THAT WE THERE'S DATA ON
THAT THAT WE SHOULD BE POINTING
TO BECAUSE HOUSING IS A
SUSTAINABILITY SOLUTION.
OK, OK, SO WE WILL WORK ON
EITHER PULLING MORE DATA AND
TRYING TO EXPLAIN OUR CURRENT
ISSUE BETTER IN THIS SECTION.
>> YEAH, JUST TO CORRECT
GENERAL PROBLEM IT WOULD BE
HELPFUL IF YOU CAN DIG IT UP TO
TRY AND GET A BETTER SENSE
OF THE HOUSING STUFF THAT'S
BEEN IN THE PIPELINE BEFORE THE
LAST SIX YEARS AND PEOPLE ARE
ALSO WE'RE HEARING FROM FOLKS
WE'VE MADE ALL THESE CHANGES
AND NOTHING'S HAPPENED BUT IT
SOUNDS TO ME LIKE MORE MAYBE IT
HAS MAYBE SOME OF THE THINGS
WE'VE DONE ARE ACTUALLY
STARTING TO SHOW SOME BENEFITS
BY INCREASED HOUSING NUMBERS.
BUT I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S
HIDDEN IN THE DATA SOMEWHERE.
SO IF YOU COULD PASS THAT, THAT
WOULD BE HELPFUL INFORMATION TO
KNOW.
OK, SO NEXT PAGE, RIGHT?
>> YEP.
OK, SO YES, HERE IS THE
AFFORDABILITY PART.
YEAH.
WHERE WE CAN HAVE THIS
DISCUSSION I THINK THAT'S WHAT
YOU WERE REFERRING TO.
>> OK THAT THAT POINT THERE IS
JUST WHAT YOU DO WITH MEDIAN
INCOME.
I'M NOT SURE IF THE NUMBERS ARE
CORRECT AS OTHERS HAVE
MENTIONED OR IN RELATION TO
WHAT IT ACTUALLY COST TO LIVE
IN ANN ARBOR.
BUT THAT'S A GREAT DEFINITION
OF A ABILITY VERSUS INCOME
ELIGIBLE OR INCOME QUALIFIED
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING IS WHAT WE
MEAN WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
AFFORDABILITY BUT WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT A ABILITY IT'S THAT YOU
KNOW, IF YOU'RE AT THE MEDIAN
INCOME YOU OUGHT TO BE ABLE HER
BY A MEDIAN HOUSE WHATEVER THE
MEDIAN HOUSE LOOKS LIKE.
YEAH, AND I DO ON THIS ONE THE
NUMBERS JUST DON'T SEEM RIGHT
TO ME.
I CAN'T SEE THAT IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE THE AVERAGE SALES
PRICE OF A HOUSE WAS TWO NINETY
NINE.
YEAH THAT'S TRUE.
THAT CAN'T BE TRUE LIKE THAT
THAT JUST I FIND THAT SHOCKING.
I CAN SEE THE SOURCE.
OK WELL CAN YOU SOMETHING SO I
WILL LOOK INTO THAT AND ALSO
BECAUSE WE DO HAVE TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR NUMBERS NOW AND A
LOT OF THESE THINGS IF WE COULD
USE TWENTY TWENTY BUT IF NOT
STILL THE TWENTY TWENTY THREE
NUMBERS ARE OUT SO IT MAY BE
THE CASE TOO THAT YOU DON'T
WANT TO RELY JUST ON MEDIANS
THERE COULD BE A SKEWED
DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING COSTS
THAT MAY BE WORTH A LITTLE BIT
MORE DATA ON THE DISTRIBUTION
OF HOUSING TYPES AND COSTS.
THAT'S THE AMAZING SOURCE
OF DATA.
THAT'S WHERE THIS DATA
APPARENTLY CAME FROM.
I DID MY STUDENTS KETAMINE'S
AND THINGS OUT OF ZILLOW.
ONE THING I WOULD LOVE TO SEE
IS UNDER THE NEIGHBORHOODS THE
SIX POINT THE CITY STILL LACKS
LOCALLY SERVING RETAIL.
IF WE COULD JUST HELP PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND HOW MANY HOUSEHOLDS
ARE NECESSARY FOR RETAIL JUST
EVEN A SMALL NUMBER.
>> IT'S THE LAST SOMEWHERE THAT
IS PROVIDED UNDER YEAH IT'S NOT
HERE.
I THINK THERE'S AN ECONOMY AND
OPPORTUNITY.
IT LISTS THE DIFFERENT KINDS UM
CATEGORIES OF RETAIL AND HOW
MANY HOUSEHOLDS ARE NEEDED OR
IF YOU ARE WILLING A FOOTNOTE
TO A GLOSSARY LATER JUST
BECAUSE I HAVE TO LOOK THAT UP
A LOT TO SAY LIKE OH IT'S ABOUT
A THOUSAND CAN ALSO I JUST SAY
GOOD REFERENCE PAGE SIXTY EIGHT
LIKE PAGE SIXTY EIGHT RIGHT.
>> YES BUT I'M STRIKING THAT
WHOLE SECTION SO WHEREVER THAT
ENDS UP WHEREVER THAT BOX ENDS
UP CAN YOU HELP LOCATE ME.
UM WHAT BULLET POINT YOU'RE
REFERRING TO ARE WE I WAS ON
TRADE FIFTY THE LAST BULLET
POINT OF THE TWO COLUMNS UNDER
KEY CONSIDERATIONS STARTING THE
SENTENCE THE CITY STILL LACKS.
>> YES.
SO JUST RIGHT THERE AT THE END
I THINK IT WOULD JUST BE
HELPFUL FOR PEOPLE WHEN THEY
READ THAT TO GET A QUICK
REFERENCE TO HOW MANY
HOUSEHOLDS IT TAKES TO SUPPORT
A GROCERY STORE.
SO LIKE BECAUSE WE HEAR A LOT
ABOUT THE GEORGE DIDN'T THE
GEORGE WASHINGTON
WHILE WE'RE
KIND OF ZOOMED IN ON THIS JUST
KIND OF ACROSS THE BOARD LIKE
FOR RIGOR IN THE CITATION
PROCESS OF CONSISTENCY
OF FORMATTING I JUST THOUGHT
OF THE ACADEMIC YES.
WHY ARE WE GETTING A LITTLE
SLOPPY WITH THE CITATION
CITATIONS AND SO I'LL HAVE YOU
KNOW I OF NOTE WE GAVE THEM
IMMEDIATELY SO THEY WENT BACK
IN THAT REMEMBER WE HAD THAT WE
EXPAND AND THEY JUST CITED THE
LIKE MOST PROBABLY WHAT THEY
ANTICIPATED WOULD GET A LOT
OF QUESTIONS.
>> THEY WILL CONTINUE TO SAY
THIS DELIVERABLE FORMAT.
>> I THINK THE FORMAT YEAH THE
FORMATTING SHOULD BE CONSISTENT
AS WELL AS JUST THE RIGOR
BEHIND IT.
>> RIGHT.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
IT'S THIS IS BASED IN FACT
SPECIFICITY OF A LOT OF THE
CITATIONS ARE TOO VAGUE
CITATIONS TO THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN LIKE CALLED WHAT
WHAT UNIVERSITY DOCUMENT ARE
CALLING THAT FROM THE ONE I'M
SORRY THAT ONE THAT ONE THE ONE
DOCUMENT THAT YOU HAVE IS
PRETTY WE WANT TO GO THROUGH
BULLET POINT BY BULLET POINT ON
THIS ONE OR HOW WOULD YOU LIKE
TO GO OVER THIS PAGE?
>> UM, WE'VE WE'VE TACKLED SOME
OF THEM.
THERE ARE WERE SOME QUESTIONS
PAGE ARE WE ON PAGE FIFTY THERE
WERE QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
PROPERTY TAXES THAT I HAVE
LISTED HERE SO SOMEONE DOESN'T
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S MEANT BY
PROPERTY TAX RECEIPTS IMPACT
THE ABILITY OF THESE HOMEOWNERS
TO DOWNSIZE.
BUT CAN YOU EXPLAIN HOW THAT
WORKED SO IT MAKES SENSE.
>> IT'S JUST NOT VERY WELL
WRITTEN OR IT DIDN'T MAKE SENSE
TO ME EVERY TIME I ADDING I
DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS WHEN
YOU PLACE YOUR TAXES.
YEAH, UNCAPPING OF NOT A SMALL
PLACE BUT IT'S STILL YOUR TAXES
ARE GOING TO BE WAY HIGHER THAN
WHAT THEY'RE PROBABLY WAS THERE
BEFORE YOU AND YOU YOU GET WHAT
YOU'RE PAYING ON YOUR CURRENT
HOUSING SO YOU HOLD ON TO THAT
HOUSING UNTIL YOU DIE AND THERE
ARE PEOPLE WAITING TO GET IN IT
AND THEY WILL NEVER GET IN IT
LOOKS LIKE THE RESTAURANT.
>> LET'S JUST SAY THAT THEN.
>> YEAH, I THINK THEY'RE JUST
BEING SPECIFIC ABOUT HOW
TAXABLE VALUE ON CAPS TO
EQUALIZE AND ASSESSED VALUE OR
JUST LIKE THE PROPERTY NEAR
MOST PEOPLE PROPERTY TAX ON
CAPS AS OPPOSED RESETS BECAUSE
THAT ISN'T RIGHT LIKE AN
OPERATIVE VERB IT FEELS LIKE
PROPERTY TAX RESETS IN.
>> YEAH.
SO IT DOESN'T RESET ON CAPS SO
OK YEAH JUST YEAH I WANT TO
MAKE IT CLEAR TO THINK ABOUT
THE STATE EQUALIZE ABOUT YOU
CAN ALSO JUST WAS IT CLEAR TO
ME WHAT THE ARGUMENT WAS MEANT
TO BE THERE.
I MEAN SO I MEAN SO THAT'S WHAT
I WROTE IN MY LONG COMMENT ON
THAT YOU KNOW IT SEEMS LIKE YOU
WANT TO KNOW WHAT DOES THIS
WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF .
>> YEAH.
WHAT ARE YOU TRYING TO SAY?
I MEAN IS NOT WHAT ARE YOU BUT
WHAT ARE THEY TRYING TO SAY?
I MEAN I UNDERSTAND I CAN I CAN
TELL A STORY ABOUT THAT WHICH I
THINK THE STORY IS PEOPLE WHO
ARE PEOPLE ARE RELUCTANT TO
MOVE INTO MORE NEAT APPROPRIATE
HOUSING, YOU KNOW, HOUSING
THAT'S APPROPRIATELY SIZED TO
THEIR NEEDS.
>> SO THEY'RE GOING TO HANG
ONTO IT AND THEN THIS
GENERATIONAL TURNOVER THAT
WE'RE LOOKING FOR THAT SHOULD
HAPPEN IS A DELAYED AND B IT'S
NOT GOING TO BE A WUSH.
IT'S GOING TO BE A STEADY
TRICKLE AND SO PRICES ARE JUST
NEVER GOING TO GO DOWN.
>> IT'S GOING TO BE THERE WOULD
YEAH.
I THINK I THINK THAT IS
ACTUALLY PART OF WHAT SAYING
THIS IS SAYING THAT THAT'S PART
OF THE AFFORDABILITY ISSUE,
RIGHT?
YES.
BECAUSE YOU HAVE A LIMITED
SUPPLY THAT'S GOING TO TURN YES
.
IT'S GOING TO BE PROHIBITIVELY
EXPENSIVE FOR THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE TRYING TO GET INTO THOSE.
>> YES, IT IS HILLSIDE'S INCOME
HOMEOWNERS HAVE INCENTIVES TO
HANG ONTO THIS HOUSING AND IT
IS GOING TO SLOW THEM DOWN FROM
LEAVING IT AND PROSPECTIVE
BUYERS ARE LIMITED.
>> YES, YES, ABSOLUTELY.
>> JUST BECAUSE OF THE COST
COST OF THE HOUSE WITH THE
TAXES.
BUT THEY WILL PAY FOR IT.
YEAH.
YES.
AND THEN IT'S WEIRD BECAUSE THE
NEW BUYERS ACTUALLY PAY A LOT
MORE TOWARD DENHA STRUCTURES
AND THE AMENITIES AND THE CITY
RESOURCES THAN ALL LONG TERM.
LONG TERM YES.
YEAH.
>> OK SO THERE THERE ARE A LOT
OF I THINK THERE'S A COUPLE
OF DISTINCT ARGUMENTS PACKED
INTO THAT WHICH TO BEGIN WITH
IS COULD YOU WORDED MORE
CLEARLY JUST TO COME TO THEIR
DEFENSE FOR ONE SECOND?
>> UM, WE ASKED FOR A LOT AND
WE ASKED FOR THEM TO MAKE IT
NOT A THREE HUNDRED PAGE
DOCUMENT RIGHT.
WE GAVE THEM A PAGE CONSTRAINTS
WHICH NOW I'M WONDERING IF WE
SHOULD HAVE BUT YOU WANT A TWO
HUNDRED AND FIFTY PAGE DOCUMENT
PART OF BEING ACCESSIBLE IS
BEING KIND OF PUNCHY LIKE
BULLET POINT SURE.
MAKE THAT MAKE THE ARGUMENT
TIGHT AND I UNDERSTAND THAT
THERE ARE SOME SHORTCOMINGS TO
THAT BUT UM WHERE IT NEEDS TO
BE EXPANDED WE'RE HAPPY TO DO
THAT.
I'M JUST SAYING THAT THAT THAT
MIGHT BE WHY YOU FEEL LIKE SOME
THINGS ARE REALLY CONDENSED AS
WE SAID LIKE ONE HUNDRED PAGES
WHICH THEY EXCEEDED.
BUT NO, I THINK WE SUPPORT THAT
TOPIC IN PARTICULAR MERITS SOME
MORE.
>> IT'S JUST TOO CRYPTIC RIGHT
NOW.
THERE'S NOT ENOUGH EXPLANATION
ON HERE.
>> OK, SMALL COMMENT ABOUT
AVERAGE WALK SCORE TO YOUR
GROCERY.
I DID THINK YOU BOY I DID WALK
SCORE IT AND THEN MAYBE ALSO I
KNOW THEY DEFINE IT IN LINE BUT
HOUSING COST BURDEN SEEMS LIKE
SOMETHING ELSE FOR THE GLOSSARY
.
>> THANKS.
I FEEL LIKE I HAVE THIS LEADER
.
I THINK IT'S WEIRD THAT WE HAVE
TEN MINUTE FIFTEEN MINUTE
TWENTY MINUTE AND I REALLY LIKE
THERE'S JUST DIFFERENT AND I
RECOGNIZE
I'M WILLING TO WALK A
LONGER WAYS FOR SOME AMENITIES
OF OTHERS AND THIS MAP I
THOUGHT WAS REALLY COOL IN
TERMS OF SHOWING WHAT I TOOK
FROM THIS MAP IS THAT ARE DOTS
OF SHOPPING AREAS ARE NOT IN
RESIDENTIAL PLACES.
THIS IS PART OF A PROBLEM.
RIGHT.
AND RESIDENTIAL PLACES DON'T
HAVE THE BORDER.
THERE'S A LOT OF PLACES THAT
ARE IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS WHERE
THEY CANNOT WALK IN THAT
FIFTEEN MINUTES TO GET TO ONE
OF THE SHOPPING CENTERS AND I
FEEL LIKE THIS IS SOMETHING WE
ALSO TALKED ABOUT IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN OR IN DAY
TO ZERO.
AND SO I WOULD ACTUALLY PREFER
TO USE ONE OF THOSE MAPS EVEN
IF WHAT WE'RE SHOWING IS THE
SHOPPING CENTERS SO I JUST UM
THAT'S FINE.
I JUST WANT TO CLARIFY ONE
OF THE REASONS WE DID A NEW MAP
SOME OF THOSE OTHER MAPS
AGGREGATED THINGS THAT IS IF
THERE WAS A SCHOOL OR A
SHOPPING CENTER OR A SERVICE,
IT WAS DEEMED TO BE A 15 MINUTE
OR 20 MINUTE NEIGHBORHOOD.
THIS IS THAT WHAT ARE THE AREAS
THAT HAVE EVERYTHING WITHIN
WALKABILITY?
SO THAT'S WHERE THE MAP IS
DISTINCT.
IT MAY NOT BE EXPLAINED THAT
WAY BUT WHEN YOU WHEN YOU LOOK
AT SOME OF THOSE OTHER MAPS, IF
YOU HAVE ONE SCHOOL YOU'RE
GOING TO SHOW UP AS WALKABLE
AND THAT WAS PART OF THE
INTENTION HERE.
WE CAN DEFINITELY GO BACK TO
ONE OF THOSE OTHER DISTRICTS
BUT THAT'S WHY YOU'RE SEEING
SOME DISTINCTION.
>> WHAT.
>> WHAT ARE THE OTHER THINGS
THAT EVERYTHING IN THIS MAP IS
THIS SIZE?
>> THESE ARE AREAS WHERE YOU
HAVE ONE OF EVERYTHING
EVERYTHING BEING A SCHOOL,
PROBABLY A FOOD OR JUST A PARK.
>> YEAH, WELL I'M GETTING THAT
FROM THE WALK SCORES THAT ARE
ON THERE BUT THE COLORING
SUGGESTS TO ME THAT THIS MAP IS
ONLY ABOUT SHOPPING.
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S PART
OF THE THAT'S AND IT'S
SOMETHING SECOND ACROSS THE U.
MANY RESIDENTIAL AREAS BUT A
LOT OF THAT GREEN HAS
RESIDENTIAL AREAS UNDERNEATH
THAT.
THOSE ARE THE AREAS THAT HAVE
PROXIMITY TO THOSE SERVICES.
SO I DON'T THINK IT'S JUST
ABOUT COMMERCIAL AREAS.
THIS IS AREAS THAT HAVE
MULTIPLE AMENITIES IN PROXIMITY
TO THOSE GEOGRAPHIES.
BUT OBVIOUSLY THAT'S NOT COMING
ACROSS THAT SIDE THE WAY TO THE
MAJOR CENTER OR MAJOR
COMMERCIAL NODE.
YEAH, THOSE ARE THE DOTS.
YEAH.
BUT YOU'RE SAYING THAT THE
WATERSHED IS THE WATERSHED IS
FROM THE SHOPPING CENTER BUT
IT'S OVERLAYING THE WALK SCORE
THAT I THINK IS MORE THAN JUST
THE WALK SHED IF WE'RE GOING TO
GO BACK TO SOMETHING OR THE
TRANSPORTATION IS IT NECESSARY
TO REPEAT IT HERE?
>> I THINK THAT MAPS TELL GOOD
STORIES.
>> I AGREE AND THAT'S WHAT I
REALLY WELL I MEAN THAT'S WHERE
I WAS CONFUSED.
YES.
THANK YOU FOR PUSHING ON.
I WAS LIKE I GUESS I WAS
CONFUSED ABOUT WHAT IT WAS
DOING AND PARTICULARLY THAT THE
THE NOTE UM IN THE COLUMN RIGHT
NEXT TO IT TALKED ABOUT THE TEN
MINUTE WALK FROM PARK.
RIGHT.
ANYWAY I JUST THREW OUT KEPT ON
WONDERING I LIKE MAPS.
>> I LIKE THE MAPS A LOT TO BE
REAL HONEST BUT I WANTED THEM
ALL TOGETHER KNOW IS IS ONE
OF THE NOTES YOU'RE GIVING THAT
IN SOME INSTANCES IT'S TEN
MINUTES SOMETIMES IT'S 15,
SOMETIMES 20.
>> IN WHICH ONE DO YOU WANT
MIGHT THIS IS THE THING I THINK
THAT IS HARD AND THAT I KNOW
ONE OF THE ACTIVITIES THAT WE
DID DURING COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
WAS 15 MINUTE.
HOW LONG WOULD YOU BE WILLING
TO WALK FOR THIS?
I THINK AT LEAST ONE THAT I DID
AT THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY WAS
LIKE HERE IS YOUR CONCENTRIC
CIRCLES PUT A NUMBER BY LIKE
YES BUT WHAT IF THAT'S
DIFFERENT THAN WHAT'S IN THE
TRANSPORTATION AND THAT'S WHAT
I'M TRYING TO GET TO.
>> YEAH, I FEEL LIKE WE SHOULD
PUT WHAT WE VET IF IF WHAT WE
HEARD FROM PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
WAS FIFTEEN MINUTES WALKING TO
SHOPPING MINUTES, WHATEVER IT
WAS LIKE THAT'S THAT'S HOW I
WOULD IMAGINE THAT WE DO WE
DECIDE WHAT THOSE NUMBERS ARE
IF WE'RE GOING TO ASK PEOPLE
ABOUT HOW LONG YOU WOULD WALK
TO GO SHOPPING OR IF THERE'S
RESEARCH ABOUT HOW LONG PEOPLE
THEY TELL YOU AND THEN WHAT
THEY ACTUALLY DO WALK TO GO
SHOPPING LIKE THAT.
THAT'S HOW I WOULD DETERMINE
WHICH IS THE RIGHT NUMBER.
>> AND ALSO CAN I JUST A LITTLE
THING ON THE MAPS AND I KNOW I
PUT THIS IN THERE BUT THE
LABELS ARE NOT CORRECT ON A LOT
OF THE THINGS LIKE U OF M
RESEARCH CENTER OR U
OF HOSPITAL CENTER CAMPUS THOSE
AREN'T REAL THINGS.
UM AND THEY HAVE ACTUAL
DIFFERENT NAMES BUT ALSO ON
THIS ONE LIKE U OF M E MEDICAL
CENTER CAMPUS AND WASHTENAW
COMMUNITY COLLEGE ARE IN THE
WALK SCORE NOW IT'S NOT A GREAT
WALK SCORE BUT IT IS IN THE END
LIKE THOSE HAVE YOU CAN'T IT'S
MORE THAN FIFTEEN MINUTES TO
WALK QUESTIONING THE SHOPPING
CENTER OR NODE BECAUSE I'VE
BEEN OUT THERE AND I'VE WALKED
OUT THERE AND IT'S NOT THAT'S
NOT SO IT'S JUST NOT SOMETHING
THAT'S ILLEGAL.
I DON'T THINK THE MUSIC IS ON
THIS MAP.
I THINK IT'S JUST THE LABELS ON
THE MAP ARE YEAH I GUESS IT WAS
AH GOOD LUCK TO THE EAST BUT
WAIT YOU'RE TALKING LIKE THE
ONE THAT WALKABLE AREAS IS LIKE
U OF M E WASHTENAW COUNTY
MEDICAL CENTER CAMPUS NUTRIENT
CHANGE IS NOT GOOD NEVER
PICKING THEM UP SO I DID AS I
SAID BUT LIKE THE WAY THE
LABELS ARE EVERY ORANGE DOT IS
A SHOPPING CENTER OR NODE AND
THEN IT SAYS EVERY GREEN IS A
FIFTEEN MINUTE WALK FROM THAT
SHOPPING CENTER OR THAT NODE
THAT MIGHT NOT BE WHAT IT
INTENDS BUT THAT'S HOW IT
READS.
BUT THERE'S LIKE THIS HUGE AREA
AND PACKARD AND PRATT THAT'S
GREEN THAT SELLS VERY FAR LIKE
SOUTH OF PACKARD FLATHEADS IT
FEELS VERY PRETTY FAR FROM AN
ORANGE AND YELLOW AREAS.
I FEEL VERY CLOSE TO AN ORANGE
DOT.
DOES IT MAKE SENSE LIKE IT'S
NOT IT'S A REALLY IT'S A LOGIC
OF THE RANGE I CAN EVEN OFFSET
FROM AN ORANGE DOT AND I THINK
THAT I'LL POINT OUT AND SOME
OF IT MIGHT BE ABOUT ACCESS
LIKE YOU CAN'T CUT THROUGH YOU
GOT TO GO AROUND BUT I DON'T
KNOW THAT'S ALWAYS THE CASE.
>> LIKE DOESN'T THAT ZONE SOUTH
OF PACARD BASICALLY THE
INTERSECTION OF PACKENHAM SEEM
REALLY FAR AWAY WHEREAS IF YOU
GO OVER STADIUM LIKE NORTH
OF LIBERTY AND LIBERTY AND HERE
THAT'S ALSO MUCH CLOSER TO
STADIUM.
WELL, BECAUSE IT MAKES SENSE
WHAT I'M SAYING.
YEAH, THE LOGIC IS HARD MAYBE
JUST SOME VERIFICATION THAT THE
MAP IS CORRECT OR MAYBE PACARD
PLOT IS MISSING AN ORANGE DOT
BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT OF STUFF
THERE OR THAT'S MORE LIKE YEAH
YEAH.
AND THEN WHEN YOU THINK THAT IF
YOU GO TO COMMUNITY ACCURACY
OF THIS ONE IT MOVE TO PAGE
FIFTY TWO.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER MAJOR WAY
ON THIS SPREAD THAT YOU ALL
WANT TO DISCUSS BECAUSE THEN
WE'RE GOING TO GET INTO GOALS
AND STRATEGIES NOW WE'RE MOVING
PAST THE IDEA OK SORRY YOUR IS
THE SECOND THIS IS SORT OF THE
THING I HAVE THROUGHOUT WHERE
THEY TALK ABOUT UNDERSERVED
AREAS WHERE I MEAN I JUST I
THINK I PUT THIS IN A COMMENT
WHAT I REMEMBER I SAID YEAH BUT
LIKE THESE UNDERSERVED AREAS A
LOT HISTORICALLY THIS YEAR I
FEEL LIKE SOME OF THAT WAS LIKE
COMING FROM SOME OTHER CITIES
PLAN AND I WAS DOING A LOT
BETTER THAN A LOT OF THINGS IN
TERMS OF HAVING NOT HAVING AS
MANY LIKE UNDERSERVED AREAS.
>> SO I STILL HAVE THEM.
YOU CAN WE CAN VISUALLY SHOW
THAT THOUGH.
>> YES.
OK, WELL I'M IN UNDERSERVED
AREAS IN TERMS OF WHAT MAYBE
THAT'S THAT'S THE QUESTION UM
BECAUSE WE DO HAVE POCKETS
OF POVERTY.
UM WE HAVE DISCUSSED THIS
INTERNALLY AS A TEAM OF WHERE
DO WE WANT WHAT DATA WOULD WE
WANT.
>> WE WERE THINKING OF THE WASH
OPPORTUNITY WASHTENAW WASHTENAW
OPPORTUNITY INDEX.
>> THEY MAP VARIOUS SOME
OF THEM ARE DEMOGRAPHICS.
SOME OF THEM ARE LITERACY
RATES.
SOME OF THEM ARE HOW OFTEN
PEOPLE VOTE.
SO THAT COULD BE THAT'S THE
STARTING SOURCE WE WERE
THINKING OF USING FOR MAYBE
THAT SOMETHING ELSE TOO THAT WE
NEED TO GO ON A GLOSSARY LIKE
WHAT DO WE MEAN WHEN WE SAY
UNDERSERVED AREAS LIKE SPECIFIC
TO THIS BILL?
I'M JUST I WOULD BE I HAVE
HEARD CITY PARK STAFF SAY THEIR
GOAL IS FOR PEOPLE TO EVERYONE
TO LOOK AT A FIVE MINUTE WALK
WHERE YOU MET THE GOAL OF A TEN
MINUTE WALK TO A PARK SO I
DON'T KNOW WHAT IT MEANS
BATTERY PARK SIZE AND VEHICLE
OWNERSHIP DOES THAT MEAN THAT
SMALL PARKS DON'T COUNT?
MAYBE WE JUST GOT I DON'T KNOW
I GUESS BIGGER THAN THAT WE
WILL LOOK INTO HOW TO VISUALLY
DISPLAY WHAT WE MEAN BY
UNDERSERVED IF THAT'S THE
COMMENT.
OK, WE'RE MOVING ON TO THE
ACTUAL GOALS NOW AND THEIR
STRATEGY IS SENIOR.
YOU GET YOUR YOU MICHELLE WITH
YOUR PERMISSION WITH YOUR
PERMISSION OTHERWISE.
>> YEAH YEAH YEAH.
>> I DON'T GOING TO PAUSE JUST
FOR A SECOND OK.
>> ALL RIGHT SO I JUST WANT TO
CHECK IN WITH THE ENTIRE
PLANNING COMMISSION BECAUSE WE
HAVE TWO CITIZENS HERE WHO CAME
A LITTLE BIT LATE BECAUSE THEY
THOUGHT AGAIN USED TO START AT
SEVEN.
I THINK THIS PROCESS IS GOING
TO TAKE A WHILE.
I WOULD PERSONALLY LIKE TO GIVE
THE THREE MINUTES TO SPEAK SO
THAT THEY'RE NOT NECESSARILY
HERE FOR ANOTHER SEVERAL HOURS
THAT THEY ARE READY.
THAT'S FOR SEVERAL.
SO AT THIS TIME I'M GOING TO
JUST PAUSE THIS POTENT
COMPONENT AND GRANT THREE
MINUTES TO THE FOLKS TO SPEAK
BECAUSE I DO WANT YOU TO BE
ABLE TO TELL US AND WE WANT TO
LISTEN.
AND SO IF YOU WANT TO TAKE
THREE MINUTES YEAH.
>> PERFECT.
THANK YOU.
I GUESS THE TIMER YEAH I JUST
HEARD ABOUT THIS THING RECENTLY
AND QUITE FRANKLY I WAS
APPALLED AT HEARING SOME OF THE
THINGS SO I CAME HERE TO LISTEN
TO MYSELF.
I'M GOING TO DO MY HOMEWORK
BEFORE I COME BACK AND I AM
GOING TO COME BACK.
YOU MENTIONED SOMETHING ABOUT
CHANGES.
YOU WEREN'T SURE THAT THE
CHANGES THAT YOU ARE DOING HERE
WE'RE TAKING EFFECT YET.
LET ME TELL YOU THEY ARE TAKING
EFFECT.
THE ROADS ARE CONSTRICTED.
RUSH HOUR IS WORSE.
TRAFFIC DENSITY IS UP.
IF YOU IT'S ONLY GOING TO GET
WORSE IF YOU MAKE
MORE DENSE.
I HAVE BEEN WORKING TO MAKE
HOUSING LESS AFFORDABLE.
MY WIFE AND I BOUGHT A HOUSE IN
BURNS PARK THIRTY YEARS AGO.
WE BUILT A GARAGE.
WE PUT A DECK ON THE HOUSE.
WE'VE GOT SKYLIGHTS IN THE ROOF
AND A NEW ROOF ON IT.
WE HAVE MADE SURE THAT THE HOME
IS PRESERVED WHEN WE BOUGHT THE
HOUSE EVERY BIT OF WOODWORK WAS
PAINTED.
MY WIFE PAINSTAKINGLY STRIPPED
AND REFINISHED ALL THE WOODWORK
IN THE HOUSE.
IT IS OLD GROWTH OAK, OLD
GROWTH MAPLE, OLD GROWTH PINE
STUFF THAT WAS STARTING TO
TREES THAT WERE HARVESTED THAT
HAD BEEN GROWING DURING THE
LAST LITTLE ICE AGE SO VERY
DENSE RINGS AND VERY GOOD WOOD
THAT STUFF COULD GET
OBLITERATED IF SOMEBODY TOOK A
LOOK AT MY HOUSE AND SAID WELL
I CAN'T LIVE IN THIS SINGLE
FAMILY HOUSE BUT I'LL SELL IT
TO A DEVELOPER AND THAT
DEVELOPER COULD TAKE WHAT IS
HOUSING ONE PERSON AND THEY
COULD SAY OH WE COULD PUT FOUR
FAMILIES IN HERE OR MAYBE EIGHT
BECAUSE WE'VE GOT A DEEP LOT
AND THAT WHOLE THING COULD BE
BUILT IN OR THE PERSON NEXT TO
ME COULD RUN INTO THAT
SITUATION AND NOW I'M LIVING
COMPLETELY IN THE SHADE AND MY
STREET WHICH HAS OLDER TREES
NOW HAS FEWER TREES AND FEWER
GARDENS BECAUSE OF THERE THIS
THERE'S THIS DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S NOT YOUR DUTY TO MAKE
THINGS AFFORDABLE.
I JUST WANT TO TELL YOU THAT
NOBODY IS IS VIOLATING THE LAW
BY MAKING A PORCHE MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN THE FIESTA MY
WIFE DRIVES AND SHE'S NOT
DEPRIVED BY NOT BEING ABLE TO
BUY A MERCEDES.
YOU KNOW, IF ANN ARBOR IS A
DESIRABLE COMMUNITY, IT'S GOING
TO BE WORTH MORE AND THESE
HOUSING GOALS GOING ON.
ARE YOU TELLING THE YPSILANTI
IS ON A PAR WITH BLOOMFIELD
HILLS WHERE HOUSING GOES.
IS IT ONE SIZE FITS ALL THIS
TRAVERSE CITY OR HISTORIC AREAS
OF PITOFSKY HAVE TO DO WHAT
THEY DO IN JACKSON.
IT'S THAT'S CRAZY.
YOU KNOW, IF IF THERE IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO BUILD AND THERE
IS A DEMAND FOR IT, THEN PEOPLE
WILL BUILD.
AND FURTHERMORE WHEN YOU HAVE
SEVEN THOUSAND PEOPLE APPLYING
FOR 30 UNITS, THAT'S JUST AN
INDICATION THAT IT'S A GREAT
BARGAIN.
I'VE GONE TO STORES WHEN
THEY'VE HAD SUPER SALES AND
THEY'VE RUN OUT OF THINGS AND
IT WASN'T BECAUSE THEY WERE
DOING SOMETHING WRONG, IT WAS
BECAUSE IT WAS A GREAT DEAL.
ANN ARBOR IS A GREAT DEAL IF
YOU WANT TO MAKE LESS YOU WANT
MORE AFFORDABLE JUST MAKE IT
LIKE DETROIT, OK?
THAT'S VERY AFFORDABLE IN
DETROIT.
DON'T DO THAT.
>> I LIVE IN ANN ARBOR.
I'D LIKE TO LIVE IN MY ONE
HUNDRED AND TEN YEAR OLD HOUSE
.
VERY SUSTAINABLE.
THANK YOU SO SO I HEARD MISTER
MY NAME IS NANCY BRICK.
I LIVE ON WOODLAND IN ANN ARBOR
WHICH IS RIGHT ON THE EDGE
OF BERN'S PARK.
WE'RE VERY CLOSE TO THE STUDENT
CENTER.
I DIRECT THE HISTORIC
PRESERVATION PROGRAM EASTERN
MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY SO I THINK
A LOT ABOUT HOUSING AND WHAT
PEOPLE EXPECT FROM HOUSING AND
WHAT OUR OBLIGATIONS ARE TO
COMMUNITIES WITH OLDER HOUSES.
>> FIRST OF ALL, MY
NEIGHBORHOOD IS REALLY DENSE AS
IT IS AND I READ THAT WE NEED
GREATER DENSITY IN RESIDENTIAL
AREAS.
THAT'S OF GRAVE CONCERN TO ME.
MY HOUSE SHARES A DRIVEWAY WITH
THE HOUSE NEXT DOOR.
THE HOUSE NEXT TO ME SHARES A
DRIVEWAY WITH THE OTHER HOUSE
NEXT DOOR.
IT COULDN'T BE MORE DENSELY
PACKED AS IT IS.
I'M EXTRAORDINARILY CONCERNED
ABOUT THE FACT THAT A HOUSE
COULD GO UP ON THE STREET AND
GO ALL THE WAY TO THE EDGE AND
WE WILL BE EVEN MORE DENSELY
PACKED THAN IT IS NOW.
AND AS FAR AS I CAN TELL THE
RESTRICTIONS WILL BE OFF AND
THE POPE SAID THAT WE SHOULD
LEAVE IT UP TO THE HOMEOWNERS
TO TO DO WHAT THEY WANT TO DO
WITH DEVELOPING THE LOFT THAT'S
OF GRAVE CONCERN TO US BECAUSE
WE THINK THAT WE BOUGHT INTO A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT IS ALREADY
FAIRLY DENSE, IT'S QUITE
WALKABLE THAT LOTS ARE NOT
EXTRAORDINARILY LARGE.
WE'RE CLOSE TO A PARK.
WE IN SOME WAYS WE HAVE BOUGHT
INTO A NEIGHBORHOOD THAT WAS
DENSELY POPULATED.
IT'S NOT BIG HUGE LOTS THAT I
SEE IN OTHER PARTS OF ANN
ARBOR.
>> I DON'T KNOW IF YOU CAN PICK
AND CHOOSE OR THERE ARE
RESTRICTIONS ON HOW YOU DO IT
BUT WE CAN'T SHOEHORN MORE
PEOPLE INTO OUR NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S GOING TO BE A REAL
CHALLENGE.
THE OTHER THING I'M CONCERNED
ABOUT IS AS A PRESERVATIONIST
YOU'RE ALL WORRIED ABOUT
SUSTAINABLE.
YEAH, WELL, I'VE BEEN HEARING
RUMORS THAT THERE ARE WONDERFUL
HOUSES THAT PEOPLE DON'T WANT
TO SELL IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
BECAUSE THEY MIGHT BE ABLE TO
GET MORE HOUSES UNDER THE LOT
OR THE LOT AND BUILD, YOU KNOW,
FOUR STORY THREE STOREY
RESIDENCES AND ALL OF THAT
BEAUTIFUL OLD BRICK AND WOOD ET
CETERA GOES RIGHT INTO A
LANDFILL.
IT'S HARDLY SUSTAINABLE AND
THAT EMBODIED ENERGY OF COURSE
YOU KNOW THE PHRASE YOU KNOW
THE MOST THE GREENEST HOUSE IS
THE ONE IT'S ALREADY BUILT.
IT'S GOING TO GO RIGHT INTO THE
LAND.
I THINK WE HAVE SOME
OBLIGATIONS TO LOOK AT
SUSTAINABILITY AND ALSO A
DIFFERENT WAY WHAT HOUSES CAN
BE OBLITERATED FOR DEVELOPMENT
?
THEY SAID OUR NEIGHBORHOOD IS
DENSE AND IT'S NOT A HISTORIC
DISTRICT NOW BUT MAYBE IT'S
TIME TO CONSIDER THE FACT THAT
THIS AREA SHOULD BE A HISTORIC
DISTRICT SO WE CAN MAINTAIN THE
FOOTPRINT THAT WAS PUT THERE
AND HASN'T REALLY BEEN VIOLATED
AND ENSURE THAT WE HAVE ENOUGH
ROOM TO LIVE BECAUSE IT'S RIGHT
ON THE EDGE RIGHT NOW.
IT WAS BUILT IN THE TEENS AND
THE 20S AS BEING A FAIRLY DENSE
NEIGHBORHOOD VERY CAREFULLY
DESIGNED TO SHARE RESOURCES.
THANK YOU.
APPRECIATE YOUR COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU, PAUL, FOR MAKING
TIME FOR THE REST OF THE
COMMISSION ON THAT PARTICULAR
ITEM THAT WAS TO ACCOMMODATE
THESE TWO THAT HAVE SHOWN UP.
WE'RE GOING TO GET BACK INTO
OUR DISCUSSION ABOUT THIS FOR
THOSE OF YOU THAT MAY BE
WATCHING VIRTUALLY THERE IS
ANOTHER TIME FOR PUBLIC COMMENT
AND SO THAT WILL COME AFTER OUR
REVIEW ON THIS WAS SIMPLY TO
COMMEMORATE THOSE THAT HAVE
COME A LITTLE BIT LATE DUE TO
THE TIME CHANGE.
>> SO ALL RIGHT.
LET'S GET BACK INTO IT.
I THINK WE ARE ON PROPERTY TAX
.
>> WE ARE INTO GOALS AND
STRATEGIES.
GOAL NUMBER ONE SPENDING.
>> OK, SO I'M LOOKING AT PAGE
FIFTY TO GO ONE.
I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING LIKE WE
CAN GO THROUGH THESE COMMENTS
BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE A TON HERE
THAT ARE EASILY GROUPED
TOGETHER.
I HAVE FIFTY FIFTY TWO ONE
POINT ONE I SUGGESTED YOU WRITE
WE COULD START THERE SO I WAS
ONE OF THOSE LOOKS LIKE THERE
ARE TWO OF US WHO SUGGESTED HE
WRITES I'M NOT MARRIED TO MY
REWRITE BUT MY ISSUE IS THAN
THE USE OF THE TERM BUILDING
FORM CONTROLS AND ALSO THIS
PHRASE MAINTAIN LOW RISE
DEVELOPMENT.
THAT'S NOT A DRASTIC CHANGE IN
SCALE FROM WHAT EXISTS IN
NEIGHBORHOODS NOW.
SO MY SUGGESTION WAS TO REALIZE
THAT TO SAY SOMETHING MORE
ALONG THE LINES OF UTILIZE FORM
BASED CODE TO DIRECT THE SCALE
OF LOW RISE DEVELOPMENT.
>> BUT WE CAN SEE SOMEBODY ELSE
DOWN BELOW ALSO HAD I THINK
THESE LITTLE PLACES WHERE
THERE'S LIKE THIS EQUIVOCATION
.
YEAH, DON'T MAKE ME
UNCOMFORTABLE.
>> ARE YOU SAYING THAT YOU
THINK THAT IT IS DRASTIC?
>> IS THAT THE PART THAT YOU
THINK IS THAT JUST LIKE A VERY
AN ACTIONABLE TERM TO ME LIKE I
DON'T KNOW WHAT KIND OF PLASTIC
I DON'T KNOW WHAT YOU THINK IS
DRASTIC RELATIVE TO WHAT I
THINK IS DRASTIC RELATIVE TO
WHAT A COMMUNITY THOUGHT WAS
PLASTIC.
AND IF WE DOES THAT IS THAT A
EUPHEMISM FOR SOMETHING?
SO I WOULD JUST SAY HOW DID DO
IS COMMUNICATE THAT THERE
SHOULD BE SOME CONSIDERATION
OF EXISTING NEIGHBORHOOD SCALE?
YOU COULD JUST SAY THAT OK, AND
THEN I I DON'T LIKE FROM
CONTROLS I'D RATHER SAY FOR
THIS TODAY IF YOU THINK THAT'S
TOO WONKY I'M HAPPY TO TRY TO
BRAINSTORM A LESS WONKY WAY TO
SAY IT BUT ALSO GO IN THE
GLOSSARY FOR BASE CODE .
>> YES IF WE USE IT I THINK WE
SHOULD MOVE TOWARDS SOMETHING
LIKE THAT TO FORM BASE SPECIFIC
.
THAT'S A TERM FROM THIS COZIES
AND I MEAN THERE YOU CAN
PERHAPS WE HAVE A LITTLE BIT
OF IT IN ONE WE HAVE SOME FORM
BASE CANDIDATE DOWNTOWN AND
THEN OVERLAY DISTRICTS AS WELL.
THE THING THAT I'M CONCERNED
ABOUT HERE IS WHAT'S ABSENT OR
WHAT IS ASSUMED AND BEAR WITH
ME BECAUSE I HAD A CONVERSATION
THIS WEEK WITH SOMEONE THAT WAS
IN A HISTORIC DISTRICT IS THAT
THEY ARE NEUTRAL AND THEY ARE
NOT NEUTRAL.
THEY WERE INVENTED IN THE
NINETEEN SEVENTIES IN MICHIGAN
AND THEY HAVE BEEN HISTORICALLY
USED TO PREVENT DEVELOPMENT.
YEAH.
AND THEY ARE BEING PRESENTED
NEUTRALLY HERE AND SO I JUST
WANT TO RAISE THAT I DON'T KNOW
WHERE IT GOES OR IF IT SHOULD
GO ANYWHERE AND IT IS LARGELY
ABOUT THE PRESERVATION
OF MATERIAL BECAUSE THE
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER IS NOT
BRICKS AND WOOD OR NEIGHBORHOOD
CHARACTER ARE THE PEOPLE WHO
LIVE IN NEIGHBORHOODS AND THIS
WAS MY OBJECTION TO THE
CONSULTANTS AT THE ONSET WHEN
THEY STARTED TO TALK ABOUT
HOUSING TYPES AS NEIGHBORHOODS
AND I THINK THAT IS
PROBLEMATIC.
SO I GREW UP IN DEPARTMENT AND
WE HAD A NEIGHBORHOOD AND WE
HAD NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER AND
WE ALL LOOKED OUT FOR EACH
OTHER AND WE SHARED RESOURCES
AND WE COLLABORATED AND CHILD
CARE WAS EXTENDED AND THAT WAS
A FANTASTIC NEIGHBORHOOD.
I WOULD LOVE FOR MY KIDS TO
LIVE IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO WHEN WE PRESENT THIS THIS
WAY IT JUST SORT OF IGNORES HOW
HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND IN
PARTICULAR
HOW HISTORIC
DISTRICTS IN ANN ARBOR HAVE
BEEN USED IN THE 1970S AND 80S
TO PREVENT HIGHER DENSITY
HOUSING FROM BEING.
>> SO ARE YOU REFERRING TO ONE
POINT ONE WHERE IT SAYS
HISTORIC DISTRICTS WILL BE
MAINTAINED AND DEVELOP AND
DEVELOPMENT WILL CONTINUE TO
ADHERE TO EXISTING STANDARDS
AND DESIGN GUIDELINES?
>> I MEAN I KNOW THEY EXIST.
I KNOW THEY'RE STATE REGULATED.
I'M JUST SAYING YOU'RE JUST
BEING HERE ADVOCATING FOR THEM
TO SAY THAT IT IT IT INCREASES
SCARCITY OF IT DOES OK YOU WANT
TO DO THE REST OF THE
COMMISSION FEEL ABOUT LIKE I
THINK THAT PART OF THIS BALANCE
IS THERE'S BEEN SOME
CONVERSATION THROUGH ENGAGEMENT
ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT WE SHOULD
KEEP HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR
WHETHER WE SHOULDN'T.
I THINK IT'S ALONG THESE LINES
GENERALLY I HAVEN'T HEARD A LOT
OF COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
ADVOCACY FOR ELIMINATING THEM.
THAT'S NOT TO SAY WE HAVEN'T
HEARD ANY I.
I AGREE THAT IT HAS AN IMPACT
OF CONSTRAINING HOUSING SUPPLY
IN THOSE AREAS.
IT'S ALSO DEFINITELY PAST
LEGISLATIVE POLICY OF THE CITY
THAT WE DON'T HAVE TO ABIDE BY
IN THE FUTURE.
BUT DO WE WANT TO RECOGNIZE IT
IN THIS PLAN AS SOMETHING TO
PERPETUATE?
I GUESS THAT'S A QUESTION
BECAUSE I DIDN'T DON'T KNOW
ENOUGH ABOUT IF THEY ARE
RECOGNIZED BY THE STATE FOR
EXAMPLE, THEY ARE WHAT THAT
MEANS THAT UM FOR HOW THAT
INTERSECTS WITH OUR ZONING SO
JUST AT A VERY HIGH LEVEL WE
HAVE FIFTEEN HISTORIC DISTRICTS
THAT REQUIRE EXTERIOR CHANGES
BROADLY THERE ARE SOME
EXCEPTIONS TO THAT THAT HAVE TO
BE APPROVED FOR FIDELITY TO THE
ERA OF TIME IN WHICH THAT THE
PERIOD OF SIGNIFICANT THAT
DISTRICT WAS ESTABLISHED IN
THAT PERIOD OF TIME CAN BE
DIFFERENT FROM DISTRICTS.
BUT IT IS BY NATURE A BIT
OF LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK TO PRESERVE A
NEIGHBORHOOD AND AMBER BECAUSE
WE BECAUSE THE CITY IN THE PAST
HAS RECOGNIZED THAT THERE'S
VALUE IN THAT AND SO ZONING AND
THOSE REGULATIONS CAN COEXIST.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE DOWNTOWN WE
WOULD ALLOW MAYBE ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY OR ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY FOOT BUILDING WHERE THE
MICHIGAN THEATER IS.
HOWEVER, THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
REGULATIONS FOR THAT WOULD
LIKELY PREVENT A NEW ADDITION
BEING PUT ON TOP OF THAT
BUILDING THAT WOULD REALLY
COMPROMISE THE HISTORIC
INTEGRITY OF THAT DISTRICT
BEING ESTABLISHED TRYING TO
RECOGNIZE THAT FORM IN ITS
CURRENT STATE.
SO THAT'S AN EXAMPLE WHERE
ZONING MIGHT BE MORE PERMISSIVE
BUT THE LIKELIHOOD OF THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
RECOGNIZING THAT A 15 STOREY
ADDITION ON TOP OF THAT
BUILDING WOULD NOT HAVE AN
ADVERSE IMPACT PRESERVING THAT
BUILDING IN ITS PERIOD
OF SIGNIFICANCE THOSE TO
INDEPENDENTLY FUNCTION AND BOTH
APPLY TO THAT PROPERTY.
>> YEAH.
DOES THAT HELP BUILD IT?
>> IT DOES.
AND JUST TO BE CLEAR LIKE WE UM
I GUESS I DON'T WANT TO GET
INTO A HISTORIC DISTRICT
CONVERSATION NECESSARILY BUT
LIKE IF IT'S BEEN ESTABLISHED
CAN IT BE ESTABLISHED AS ONE
AND I FELT ON THE ONE HAND IF
THE REALITY IS THE PRESENCE
OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT MEANS
THAT THERE IS LESS LIKELY TO BE
A CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY, I
THINK IN SOME WAYS THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO SAY AND IF THAT'S
ALSO YOU CAN SEE MY YOUR QUOTES
BECAUSE I'M NOT TALKING TO IN
REAL IF THAT'S THE WAY THAT YOU
DON'T HAVE CHANGE IN YOUR IN
YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD, I THINK THAT
THAT IS A PERVERSE OUTCOME
OF NEW HISTORIC DISTRICTS BEING
FORMED.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT IS WHAT WE
WOULD WANT TO ENCOURAGE.
AND SO THAT'S WHAT I'M WEIGHING
IN MY MIND WITH THIS SENTENCE
BECAUSE I THINK IT'S BOTH IT'S
BOTH A REALITY AND LIKE I DON'T
KNOW HOW YOU WEIGH LIKE HOW YOU
BALANCE THOSE TWO THINGS.
>> I I THINK THERE IS A BALANCE
TO TRY TO GET SOME SORT
OF WHERE THE MIND OF THE
COMMISSION IS.
I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY WHERE
THE CITY IS RIGHT NOW.
RIGHT.
AS WE WOULD THE WAY WE'VE
TALKED ABOUT IN THIS PLAN IS WE
WOULD CONTINUE TO PRESERVE 15
THAT EXIST BUT THAT WE ARE NOT
ENCOURAGING MORE.
>> THE WAY THAT YOU LAID IT OUT
IS MY UNDERSTANDING OF KIND
OF A CITY STANCE ON IT RIGHT
NOW.
>> THEN YOU MIGHT WANT TO SAY
THAT.
AND AGAIN, I THINK ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT PEOPLE WILL HAVE
IS WELL MAYBE I ASKED AND THEN
I SAID YOU DON'T LIKE CAN YOU
ABOLISH THE ONES THAT YOU HAVE?
WHAT DOES THAT PROCESS I'M NOT
SUGGESTING JUST FOR PEOPLE
WATCHING I'M NOT SUGGESTING
THAT THAT I JUST REALLY DO NOT
KNOW HOW THAT WORKS.
YEAH, I DON'T PROFESS TO BE AN
EXPERT ON THAT AND MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT IT IS
THAT IT'S DIFFICULT BECAUSE
PART OF PART OF THE LEAD UP TO
CREATING IT IS RECOGNIZING THAT
THERE'S A PUBLIC PURPOSE VALUE
IN PRESERVING IT.
YEAH.
AND SO I DON'T KNOW WHAT
PERSPECTIVES DO CHANGE BUT I
HAVE TO LEARN MORE BUT I THINK
IT WOULD BE I MEAN IT'S IT'S
GETTING A CURRENT LEGISLATIVE
DECISION AGAINST A HISTORIC
LEGISLATIVE DECISION.
>> YEAH.
AND I THINK TO THAT POINT I
WOULD WANT TO STRIKE IT BECAUSE
I THINK IT'S I THINK
COMMISSIONER MILLER'S
ARTICULATED IT VERY WELL WHEN
SHE SAID TO ENABLE MORE WOULD
BE A PERVERSE OUTCOME AGAINST
OUR GOALS FOR DENSITY CITYWIDE
IT WILL BE MAINTAINED.
>> WE WANT TO STRIKE THAT
MAINTAIN YOU DON'T WANT TO
COMMIT TO THAT I I WOULD I
WOULD WANT TO STRIKE THEM.
>> I KNOW THAT LEGISLATIVELY IT
MAY BE NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE.
I THINK MR. LEONARD WAS BEING
KIND WHEN HE SAID DIFFICULT TO
UNWIND A HISTORIC DISTRICT
BECAUSE I THINK ALL OF THE
MEMBERS OF THE HISTORIC
DISTRICT HAVE TO AGREE THAT IT
HAS TO GO TO THE LEGISLATIVE
BODY AND THAT IT HAS TO BE
APPROVED BY THE STATE.
SO THERE'S AT LEAST THREE
STAGES WHERE WHERE THAT CAN RUN
OFF THE RAILS.
>> BUT I DON'T THINK IT'S IN
OUR FUTURE THREAT THAT THAT'S
MY SINGULAR ARTICULATION.
>> SO I THINK WHAT I WOULD ONE
OF THE THINGS WITH THE HISTORIC
DISTRICTS FOR NOT NECESSARILY
ALL OF OUR HISTORIC DISTRICTS
BUT MANY TO MOST OF THEM
THEY'RE ALREADY FAIRLY DENSE.
>> SO OLD WEST SIDE OLD FOURTH
OR THERE ARE ALREADY AREAS THAT
ARE DENSER THAN OTHER AREAS.
AND I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I WOULD LIKE TO SEE IN
HERE SO I DON'T MIND I DON'T I
ACTUALLY THINK HAVING LIKE THE
OLD WEST SIDE EXIST MAKES IT
EASIER TO TALK ABOUT HAVING
MORE DENSE HOUSING BECAUSE
THAT'S A BELOVED PART OF OUR
CITY AND WE CAN SAY LOOK, THESE
PEOPLE LIVE AND THE HOUSES ARE
CLOSE TOGETHER AND EVERYBODY
LIVES HAS GARDENS AND IT'S
LOVELY.
>> BUT I DO THINK THAT HAVING
SOME RECOGNITION THAT HISTORIC
DISTRICTS ARE A TOOL TO PREVENT
DEVELOPMENT THAT HAVING OUR
PARKS HELPS OR PREVENTS
DEVELOPMENT IN SOME PLACES AND
THAT THERE ARE I THINK
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT SAID
THERE ARE TRADEOFFS AND THAT IF
WE ARE GOING TO CONTINUE WE
WANT AS A COMMUNITY HAVE
HISTORIC DISTRICTS WHICH I
THINK GENERALLY MOST PEOPLE DO
NOT EVERYBODY CERTAINLY AND I
THINK THAT THEY ABSOLUTELY ARE
THEY WERE INITIALLY CREATED TO
PRESERVE A TYPE OF HOUSING AND
LIFESTYLE BECAUSE PEOPLE DIDN'T
WANT DIFFERENT NEIGHBORS IN HOW
TO SAY THIS.
BUT I THINK THAT IF WE SAY
RIGHT NOW THAT WE WANT TO
STRIKE HISTORIC DISTRICTS, I
THINK THAT IN LARGE PART WILL
DOOM THIS PLAN.
I THINK THAT WE WE DO NEED TO
BE REALISTIC BUT I THINK HAVING
A COMMENT THAT SAYS HISTORIC
DISTRICTS ARE HISTORICALLY X
AND DO PREVENT OR OR MAYBE LIKE
I THINK IT'S I THINK WE
SHOULDN'T JUST SAY OH, HISTORIC
DISTRICTS THAT'S GREAT.
WE SHOULD ALL HAVE HISTORIC
DISTRICTS EVERYWHERE AND AND I
DO THINK WE NEED TO SAY THAT
THEY ARE HISTORICALLY THAT WE
WE'VE ACCOMMODATED THEM BECAUSE
THEY ARE PART OF OUR EXISTING
FRAMEWORK BUT THAT MOVING
FORWARD IT'S NOT GOING TO BE
SOMETHING IF THAT'S OUR PLAN,
THAT'S THE PLAN BECAUSE THIS IS
A POLICY DOCUMENT SETTING WHAT
OUR PLAN IS I FEEL LIKE SAYING
THAT EXPLICITLY RATHER THAN
JUST BEING SILENT ON THE ISSUE
AND LEADING PEOPLE TO SUGGEST
SO THAT MAYBE THE AMENDMENT
HERE IS WHILE EXISTING HISTORIC
DISTRICTS WILL BE MAINTAINED.
RIGHT.
THAT WILL LEAD INTO THAT.
>> I THINK THAT SUPPORT FOR
THAT OH I MEAN SURE.
I MEAN THE THING I JUST WANT TO
NOTE IS AS COMMISSIONER WHETHER
IT BE ADEQUATE AND CORRECTLY
DESCRIBED THERE WERE TONS
PEOPLE WERE JUST EXCLUDED AS A
RESULT OF IT AND THAT IS WHAT
IS MISSING.
SO SOMEONE TALKED EARLIER ABOUT
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING FOR A
SINGLE DETACHED HOUSE WITHOUT
RECOGNIZING ITS ORIGINS HOW IT
WAS USED.
WE'RE NOT PROJECTING THAT ONTO
THE PERSON WHO DWELLS IN AND I
DWELL IN A SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED HOUSE IT IS BUT TO
IGNORE HOW IT CAME INTO BEING
AND TO IGNORE THAT IT'S AGAINST
THE ACTUAL I THINK ETHOS OF OUR
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE DOCUMENT
WHICH IS ANN ARBOR FOR ALL IT
JUST KIND OF ROMANCE THAT SO
THAT'S WHY I THOUGHT
COMMISSIONER MILLS ARTICULATED
VERY WELL SAY IT'S A PERVERSE
OUTCOME IF WE ARE THINKING
ABOUT CONTINUING THAT IT OK, I
THINK WE CAN ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
REALITY EXISTS BUT I DON'T I
PERSONALLY WANT TO BE ON THE
RECORD WASN'T AN ALTRUISTIC
REALITY BECAUSE WHEN YOU LISTEN
TO THE PEOPLE WHO CREATED THE
OLD FOURTH WARD THEY WILL TELL
YOU THAT THEY DID IT TO STOP
APARTMENTS FROM COMING TO THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> THAT WAS IT.
SO THAT'S NOT IN ANN ARBOR FOR
ALL.
OK, SO AS LONG AS WE ADD
CONTEXT HERE THAT THAT AS LONG
AS WE STAY THAT THIS DOES
PREVENT DEVELOPMENT AND DISCUSS
THE TRADE OFFS OF IT AND SOME
OF THE HISTORY OF IT, THEN WE
CAN LEAVE IT AS IS I'M SAYING
LESS PEOPLE CHECKING THEIR
HISTORY LIKE THE HISTORY OF OUR
IT WOULD BE FANTASTIC.
I WOULD LOVE FOR IT TO BE THERE
BUT THAT MIGHT BE MORE WORK FOR
ALSO ON THE MAP I MEAN THE
TIMELINE THAT'S WHAT WE DO HAVE
IT.
BUT IT'S IT'S ISN'T IT JUST
LIKE THE FIRST HISTORIC
DISTRICT CREATED LIKE NO OTHER
RELATED.
LET'S TALK ABOUT THE OLD FOURTH
WARD WHICH IS AS COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBY SAID, BELOVED BY MANY
AND IT IS DENSE BUT IT IS ALSO
CREATED TO BLOCK HOUSING AND
THAT'S IMPORTANT.
>> OK, CAN WE MOVE TO ONE POINT
TOO?
>> I ACTUALLY I DON'T KNOW.
I THINK THAT AN OUTCOME
OF BLOCKING HOUSING I I THINK
NOT ALL HISTORIC DISTRICTS
WOULD BE IN THAT CATEGORY AND
DEFINITELY SOME BUT I DON'T
THINK ALL DISTRICTS I'LL SEND
YOU MY PRIMARY SOURCE MATERIAL
I DEAL WITH SIDE AND THEY'LL
BOTH WORK THAT WAY.
BUT THEN THERE HAVE BEEN OTHER
HISTORIC DISTRICTS THAT I DON'T
I DON'T THINK THAT THAT WAS AN
OH SURE.
YEAH I LOVE THAT WE HAVE THE
STATE THEATER LIKE YOU KNOW IF
THAT SITS IN SOME HISTORIC
DISTRICT THAT THAT'S THEIR
RIGHT.
>> BUT I JUST THINK IF IT'S
PRESENTED NEUTRALLY I THINK IT
DOES US A DISSERVICE ESPECIALLY
WITH OUR GOALS FOR ALPHABEAT
FOR ALL THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
>> YOU WANT TO MOVE US TO ONE
POINT TOO AND I THINK THAT THIS
IS LATER ON.
BUT I JUST WANT TO NOTE IT.
I'M CONCERNED THAT WHEN WE USE
LOW DENSITY, MEDIUM DENSITY AND
HIGH DENSITY WHICH ARE ALL IN
ONE POINT ONE NOT HAVING NOT
HAVING A COMMON UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THAT MEANS IS GOING TO
SET UP FOR FAILURE.
>> YEAH, I WOULD AGREE WITH
THAT BECAUSE THE THING LIKE
MAINTAIN LOW RISE DEVELOPMENT
THAT'S NOT A DRASTIC CHANGE IN
SCALE FROM WHAT EXISTS LIKE
THAT WILL RISE WHAT IS LOW SET
FREE STORIES SO MAYBE UP TO WE
DON'T KNOW OK OK.
DID YOU SUBMIT THAT.
NO I HAVE THAT IN HERE.
I THINK THAT I DID SAY A
GLOSSARY NEEDS TO TALK ABOUT
WHAT IS MEDIUM HIGH RISE BUT I
I CAN MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY I
DON'T KNOW THAT I SAID THE LOW
RISE BUT THESE ARE THE YEAH
THESE ARE THE THINGS YEAH.
>> OK AND THE LAST SENTENCE
THAT'S THE WORD IT JUST FEELS
LIKE REALLY AWKWARD TO ME LIKE
THAT IT'S ADDING UP AND IT'S
LIKE MAYBE EVEN HIGH DENSITY
HOUSING ENCOURAGE IT CAN BE
ENCOURAGED TRANSIT CORRIDORS
AND THEN THIS ENCOURAGES WHAT I
JUST SAID A LOT OF ENCOURAGE
CENTER IF I CAN BE WORDSMITH OR
LIKE WHAT WORD WOULD YOU USE
BECAUSE I DON'T WE DON'T WANT
TO SAY WILL BECAUSE I DON'T
KNOW ANYTHING.
IT FEELS LIKE IT'S LIKE GOING
IN CIRCLES AND IT'S SUPPOSED TO
BE LIKE FAMILY TRANSIT ARE IN
DEVELOPMENT CAN BE ENCOURAGED
ALONG TREES CORRIDORS AND THEN
THAT ENCOURAGES MIXED USE
DEVELOPMENTS.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT IS
ENCOURAGING MIXED USE.
I GUESS I'M I THINK THE SECOND
CREATING SO SAYING THAT DENSER
HOUSING WILL HELP ENCOURAGE
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT.
IT COULD JUST CREATE WALKABLE
MIXED USE.
>> I SEE WHAT YOU'RE SAYING.
DENSER HOUSING IS ALSO INCLUDES
HOUSING.
>> YEAH, SO THAT'S WHERE I'M
GETTING STUCK.
>> I FEEL LIKE IT'S KIND
OF SAYING THE SAME THING BUT IN
A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT WAYS.
>> OK, WHAT'S THIS PAGE FIFTY
TWO.
>> YEAH AND THEN THE LAST
SENTENCE THIS REALLY THIS IS
ALSO VERY EFFECTIVE IN
STREAMLINING SO I ALREADY PUT
THAT IN AND COOL DIRECTLY TO
CONSULTANTS FOR THAT AND THEN
UM SOURCING THOSE WHAT IS NABIL
DO WE KNOW I MEAN I USED TO
LIKE I THINK MOST OF THE IMAGES
ARE SOME THAT WE SENT THEM BUT
I CAN'T SCROLL DOWN ON THIS
JUST THROUGH ALL I KNOW IS I
DON'T SOURCE THEM.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY'RE
SUPPOSED TO BE.
YOU CAN'T REALLY IT'S KIND
OF ILLEGAL TO STEAL PHOTOS.
THEY'RE NOT LIKE QUITE WILL BE
UH YEAH THEY'LL BE VERY WHERE
YOU WANT TO KNOW WHAT STREET
THIS IS WHY THEY DID IT OR
ESPECIALLY YEAH.
WHERE IS IT BECAUSE I IT'S
GREAT BUT NEXT TO THAT I HEAR
THAT IN CALIFORNIA I ACTUALLY
WOULD LOVE TO SWITCH BLINDS YOU
ONLY END UP LIKE IT'S A DUPLEX
BUT IT'S LIKE THE SIZE OF A
MCMANSION LIKE I THINK
SOMETHING SMALLER SCALE IT
SHOWS YOU CAN ACTUALLY HAVE A
SCARY MODEST DUPLEX IN A SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOOD WOULD MAKE
A BETTER ARGUMENT BUT ALSO I
STOP TALKING LIKE CAN I GIVE
THIS TO ONE POINT TWO?
YES.
OH, I'M NOT THAT SURE.
YES, I HAVE A GENERAL COMING
YES.
AND IT'S GOING TO APPLY TO A
YES, I HAVE A GENERAL COMING
LOT OF THE STRATEGIES WHICH IS
AND IT'S GOING TO APPLY TO A
THAT I FEEL LIKE A STRATEGY
LOT OF THE STRATEGIES WHICH IS
SHOULD BE VERY SPECIFIC AND
THAT I FEEL LIKE A STRATEGY
OFTEN THEY'RE QUITE GENERAL AND
SHOULD BE VERY SPECIFIC AND
SO I DON'T IT DOESN'T HOLD UP
OFTEN THEY'RE QUITE GENERAL AND
FOR ME AS A STRATEGY.
SO I DON'T IT DOESN'T HOLD UP
SO IN THIS ONE TWO THIRDS
FOR ME AS A STRATEGY.
OF THE WAY DOWN IT DOES DEVELOP
SO IN THIS ONE TWO THIRDS
A STRATEGY THAT INCLUDES
OF THE WAY DOWN IT DOES DEVELOP
DEVELOPER AND CONTRACTOR
A STRATEGY THAT INCLUDES
CAPACITY INCENTIVES, INCENTIVES
DEVELOPER AND CONTRACTOR
AND REGULATORY ISSUES LIKE I
CAPACITY INCENTIVES, INCENTIVES
HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THAT MEANS TO
AND REGULATORY ISSUES LIKE I
DEVELOP A STRATEGY THAT
HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THAT MEANS TO
INCLUDES REGULATORY ISSUES OR
DEVELOP A STRATEGY THAT
ANY OF IT.
INCLUDES REGULATORY ISSUES OR
SO IN GENERAL I WOULD LOVE
ANY OF IT.
THESE AND THIS COULD JUST YOUR
SO IN GENERAL I WOULD LOVE
GENERAL COMMENT TO THE
THESE AND THIS COULD JUST YOUR
CONSULTANT THAT LIKE THEY
GENERAL COMMENT TO THE
SHOULD BE ACTIONABLE STRATEGIES
CONSULTANT THAT LIKE THEY
SPECIFICALLY.
SHOULD BE ACTIONABLE STRATEGIES
>> SO THAT'S THAT'S WHAT I WAS
SPECIFICALLY.
TALKING ABOUT.
>> SO THAT'S THAT'S WHAT I WAS
WE'RE SOMETIMES WE SAID IT'S
TALKING ABOUT.
TOO SPECIFIC AND SOMETIMES IT'S
WE'RE SOMETIMES WE SAID IT'S
TOO VAGUE.
TOO SPECIFIC AND SOMETIMES IT'S
SO THIS IS AN EXAMPLE THAT'S
TOO VAGUE.
BEEN POINTED OUT AS TOO VAGUE.
SO THIS IS AN EXAMPLE THAT'S
>> UM, JUST SO YOU KNOW, THERE
BEEN POINTED OUT AS TOO VAGUE.
IS AN ADDITIONAL LEVEL TO THIS
>> UM, JUST SO YOU KNOW, THERE
CHAPTER SIX IS IMPLEMENTATION
IS AN ADDITIONAL LEVEL TO THIS
MATRIX AND THAT IS GOING TO BE
CHAPTER SIX IS IMPLEMENTATION
VERY SPECIFIC STEPS ABOUT WHAT
MATRIX AND THAT IS GOING TO BE
TO DO.
VERY SPECIFIC STEPS ABOUT WHAT
>> UM, SO THESE I GUESS IT
TO DO.
WOULD GO LIKE GOAL RADDEST
>> UM, SO THESE I GUESS IT
STRATEGY REFINE IMPLEMENTATION
WOULD GO LIKE GOAL RADDEST
LIKE TELL US MORE OR LESS
STRATEGY REFINE IMPLEMENTATION
EXACTLY.
LIKE TELL US MORE OR LESS
YEAH IT'S ALMOST LIKE
EXACTLY.
STRATEGIES ARE TOOLS LIKE WHAT
YEAH IT'S ALMOST LIKE
ARE THE TOOLS AT YOUR DISPOSAL
STRATEGIES ARE TOOLS LIKE WHAT
OR NO THAT'S NOT RIGHT.
ARE THE TOOLS AT YOUR DISPOSAL
WHAT ARE THE ANYWAY.
OR NO THAT'S NOT RIGHT.
>> YEAH CAN I ASK FOR
WHAT ARE THE ANYWAY.
CONSIDERATION OF A READER TO
>> YEAH CAN I ASK FOR
PLAN ESPECIALLY WHEN WE GET
CONSIDERATION OF A READER TO
INTO THIS PART AND WHAT I MEAN
PLAN ESPECIALLY WHEN WE GET
BY THAT IS WHAT YOU JUST
INTO THIS PART AND WHAT I MEAN
ARTICULATED.
BY THAT IS WHAT YOU JUST
WE WOULD START WITH THE GOALS
ARTICULATED.
YEAH.
WE WOULD START WITH THE GOALS
THE GOAL HERE AND THEN GO THERE
YEAH.
AND I DON'T KNOW IF THAT IS A
THE GOAL HERE AND THEN GO THERE
SEPARATE DOCUMENT THAT SETS
AND I DON'T KNOW IF THAT IS A
OUTSIDE BUT MAYBE PLANNING
SEPARATE DOCUMENT THAT SETS
STAFF COULD JUST WORK ON THAT
OUTSIDE BUT MAYBE PLANNING
JUST AS AS YOU APPROACH THIS
STAFF COULD JUST WORK ON THAT
DOCUMENT, HERE ARE SOME TIPS
JUST AS AS YOU APPROACH THIS
THAT WILL HELP YOU BECAUSE
DOCUMENT, HERE ARE SOME TIPS
YOU'RE GOING TO READ ABOUT THE
THAT WILL HELP YOU BECAUSE
GOALS AND BE WONDERING WHAT
YOU'RE GOING TO READ ABOUT THE
DOES THAT MEAN?
GOALS AND BE WONDERING WHAT
>> KEEP READING THREE PAGES
DOES THAT MEAN?
LATER WE'RE GOING TO EXPLAIN A
>> KEEP READING THREE PAGES
REALLY DETAILED TABLE AND THEN
LATER WE'RE GOING TO EXPLAIN A
KEEP READING IF YOU ENCOUNTER
REALLY DETAILED TABLE AND THEN
TERMS YOU DON'T KNOW BECAUSE
KEEP READING IF YOU ENCOUNTER
THERE'S A GLOSSARY AND THEN
TERMS YOU DON'T KNOW BECAUSE
JUST AN ACCESSIBILITY SORT
THERE'S A GLOSSARY AND THEN
OF THING FOR THE NON WORKY
JUST AN ACCESSIBILITY SORT
FOLKS.
OF THING FOR THE NON WORKY
>> WHEN YOU ALL MENTIONED THAT
FOLKS.
AT THE BEGINNING, THIS IS SORT
>> WHEN YOU ALL MENTIONED THAT
OF WHAT I WAS THINKING WHEN YOU
AT THE BEGINNING, THIS IS SORT
WERE SAYING LIKE TO EXPLAIN
OF WHAT I WAS THINKING WHEN YOU
LIKE HOW TO READ THIS DOCUMENT
WERE SAYING LIKE TO EXPLAIN
,I WAS THINKING LIKE WE NEED
LIKE HOW TO READ THIS DOCUMENT
TO EXPLAIN GOALS, OBJECTIVES,
,I WAS THINKING LIKE WE NEED
STRATEGIES, IMPLEMENTATION
TO EXPLAIN GOALS, OBJECTIVES,
MATRIX.
STRATEGIES, IMPLEMENTATION
SO I THINK THAT THAT COULD BE
MATRIX.
COVERED PROBABLY LIKE ONE
SO I THINK THAT THAT COULD BE
SPREAD AT THE BEGINNING AND THE
COVERED PROBABLY LIKE ONE
GLOSSARY AS WELL.
SPREAD AT THE BEGINNING AND THE
UM SO YEAH I GUESS WE CAN TALK
GLOSSARY AS WELL.
ABOUT THE LEVEL OF DETAIL THAT
UM SO YEAH I GUESS WE CAN TALK
WE WANT HERE.
ABOUT THE LEVEL OF DETAIL THAT
>> SO JUST TO BE CLEAR THIS
WE WANT HERE.
DOCUMENT AS WE'VE SEEN IS
>> SO JUST TO BE CLEAR THIS
CHALLENGING IN THAT WE ARE
DOCUMENT AS WE'VE SEEN IS
PLANNING TO TWENTY FIFTY SO IT
CHALLENGING IN THAT WE ARE
HAS TO BE BROAD BUT IT ALSO HAS
PLANNING TO TWENTY FIFTY SO IT
TO GIVE US DIRECTION ON WHAT WE
HAS TO BE BROAD BUT IT ALSO HAS
SHOULD DO AND SO I AGREE THAT
TO GIVE US DIRECTION ON WHAT WE
THAT'S NOT SUPER CLEAR.
SHOULD DO AND SO I AGREE THAT
WE NEED TO PROACTIVELY DEVELOP
THAT'S NOT SUPER CLEAR.
A STRATEGY THAT INCLUDES
WE NEED TO PROACTIVELY DEVELOP
DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTOR
A STRATEGY THAT INCLUDES
CAPACITY INCENTIVES AND
DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTOR
REGULATORY ISSUES.
CAPACITY INCENTIVES AND
>> BUT I DON'T KNOW HOW
REGULATORY ISSUES.
SPECIFIC THAT SHOULD GET RIGHT
>> BUT I DON'T KNOW HOW
THERE OR WE JUST STRIKE IT THAT
SPECIFIC THAT SHOULD GET RIGHT
SENTENCE I MEAN UNLESS SOMEBODY
THERE OR WE JUST STRIKE IT THAT
CAN TELL ME WHAT IT MEANS AND
SENTENCE I MEAN UNLESS SOMEBODY
WHY IT'S IMPORTANT LIKE THE
CAN TELL ME WHAT IT MEANS AND
FIRST AND THE BEFORE AND AFTER
WHY IT'S IMPORTANT LIKE THE
THAT.
FIRST AND THE BEFORE AND AFTER
I UNDERSTAND IF THE STRATEGY IS
THAT.
TO DIVERSIFY THE HOUSING TYPE,
I UNDERSTAND IF THE STRATEGY IS
THE FIRST PRIORITY IS DUPLEXES
TO DIVERSIFY THE HOUSING TYPE,
,PROPERTIES, COMPLEXES,
THE FIRST PRIORITY IS DUPLEXES
TOWNHOUSES AND COTTAGE COURTS
,PROPERTIES, COMPLEXES,
AND THE SECOND PART IS MORE
TOWNHOUSES AND COTTAGE COURTS
ACCESSIBLE HOUSING.
AND THE SECOND PART IS MORE
BOTH OF THOSE WILL ACHIEVE MORE
ACCESSIBLE HOUSING.
DIVERSITY IN HOUSING TYPE I
BOTH OF THOSE WILL ACHIEVE MORE
DON'T KNOW HOW YEAH.
DIVERSITY IN HOUSING TYPE I
SO IT'S NOT CLEAR TO ME WHAT
DON'T KNOW HOW YEAH.
THE STRATEGY OF VINCENT IS
SO IT'S NOT CLEAR TO ME WHAT
LIKE.
THE STRATEGY OF VINCENT IS
I GUESS THAT MEANS
LIKE.
INCENTIVIZING DEVELOPERS TO
I GUESS THAT MEANS
BUILD DIFFERENT KINDS
INCENTIVIZING DEVELOPERS TO
OF HOUSING.
BUILD DIFFERENT KINDS
UM I THINK THAT'S A GOOD IDEA.
OF HOUSING.
WE TALKED ABOUT ZONING IS JUST
UM I THINK THAT'S A GOOD IDEA.
ONE PIECE OF A MYRIAD
WE TALKED ABOUT ZONING IS JUST
OF INFLUENCES THAT BUILDING
ONE PIECE OF A MYRIAD
HOUSING BEING BUILT OR NOT
OF INFLUENCES THAT BUILDING
BEING CAPACITY IS GOING TO BE
HOUSING BEING BUILT OR NOT
ONE OF THEM.
BEING CAPACITY IS GOING TO BE
WE COULD SIT HERE AND HOPE THAT
ONE OF THEM.
WE'RE GOING TO QUADRUPLE OUR
WE COULD SIT HERE AND HOPE THAT
ANNUAL HOUSING SUPPLY THAT
WE'RE GOING TO QUADRUPLE OUR
WON'T BECOME A REALITY WITHOUT
ANNUAL HOUSING SUPPLY THAT
A LOT OF OTHER SUPPORT.
WON'T BECOME A REALITY WITHOUT
SO I THINK THIS IS SPECIFICALLY
A LOT OF OTHER SUPPORT.
TRYING TO GET TO RECOGNIZING
SO I THINK THIS IS SPECIFICALLY
THAT YEAH, I WE WANT TO BE MORE
TRYING TO GET TO RECOGNIZING
SPECIFIC BECAUSE I THINK THAT
THAT YEAH, I WE WANT TO BE MORE
THE STRATEGY FOR DIVERSIFYING
SPECIFIC BECAUSE I THINK THAT
MIGHT BE TO DEVELOP A STRATEGY.
THE STRATEGY FOR DIVERSIFYING
IT'S A GOOD PLAN.
MIGHT BE TO DEVELOP A STRATEGY.
I HAVE PLANS TO PLANT WHAT IT
IT'S A GOOD PLAN.
IS BECAUSE I HAVE A CONCEPT
I HAVE PLANS TO PLANT WHAT IT
OF A PLAN.
IS BECAUSE I HAVE A CONCEPT
I THINK IT COULD MAYBE JUST SAY
OF A PLAN.
THE CITY NEEDS TO INCENTIVIZE
I THINK IT COULD MAYBE JUST SAY
DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTORS
THE CITY NEEDS TO INCENTIVIZE
NEEDS TO BUILD CAPACITY AND
DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTORS
NEEDS I DYSREGULATED REGULATORY
NEEDS TO BUILD CAPACITY AND
HURDLES OR SOMETHING THAT FOR
NEEDS I DYSREGULATED REGULATORY
ME THAT'S A GOOD THAT'S A GOOD
HURDLES OR SOMETHING THAT FOR
TAKEAWAY BECAUSE WHAT WE
ME THAT'S A GOOD THAT'S A GOOD
PROBABLY WON'T GET INTO HERE IS
TAKEAWAY BECAUSE WHAT WE
WHAT DOES INCENTIVES SHOULD BE
PROBABLY WON'T GET INTO HERE IS
RIGHT.
WHAT DOES INCENTIVES SHOULD BE
>> SO WE AGREE THAT IT IS
A
LITTLE MORE SPECIFIC BUT THAT
THAT'S THE NEXT TWENTY FIVE
YEARS WE GOT TO FIGURE OUT.
>> YES.
I MEAN ONE POINT TWO CANDIDATES
MAZARI AND MAYBE ONE OF THE
THINGS I JUST LIKE UNIVERSAL
DESIGN IS LIKE SHUGDEN HERE AND
I DON'T KNOW THAT IT LIKE SURE
WE NEED IT BUT IT JUST DOESN'T
IT DOESN'T WORK.
>> IT'S CONNECTED TO ME WITH A
MIDDLE HOUSING.
YEAH.
I THINK WE CAN MAKE A BETTER
CONNECTION THERE AND SO LIKE A
GOOD EXAMPLE WOULD BE AND I'M
NOT AN EXPERT ON THIS BUT FOR
EXAMPLE THE HOUSING STRUCTURES
IF WE FOLLOW THE SAME EFFECT
FORMATS LIKE MIGHT NOT BE A
UNIVERSAL DESIGN.
>> SO LIKE ONE EXAMPLE COULD BE
THAT WE DISCUSS ONE OF OUR
FOCUS GROUPS IS LIKE UM A
BEDROOM ON THE FIRST FLOOR SO
THAT WHEN YOU HIT A CERTAIN AGE
AND YOU CAN NO LONGER CLIMB THE
STEPS THAT YOU DON'T
NECESSARILY HAVE TO MOVE SO
LIKE THAT TO ME THAT WOULD BE
AN EXAMPLE OF HOW YOU COULD
CONNECT UNIVERSAL DESIGN TO
THIS MISSING MIDDLE ARGUMENT.
>> DOES THAT MAKE SENSE SORT
OF IF YOU JUST THINK ABOUT IT
AS DIVERSIFYING HOUSING TYPE?
YEAH, NO, I MEAN I YOU KNOW,
IT'S IMPORTANT.
I JUST FELT LIKE IT WAS JUST
SORT OF TACKED ON TO THE END
WHEN MOST OF THIS IS TALKING
ABOUT MISSING MIDDLE.
>> BUT IF YOU MAKE A CONNECTION
STRONGER THEN OK, I HAVE THAT
HERE CONNECT MORE STRONGLY TO
HOUSING BUT ALSO IN THE TITLE
IF YOU TALK ABOUT UNIVERSAL
DESIGN FIRST AND MISSING MIDDLE
MAYBE DO THAT IN THE PARAGRAPH
TO SWAP THEM JUST SWAP THE
ORDER.
YEAH.
>> OR CHANGE.
OH I SEE THE STRATEGY OK OK UM
THAT'S ALL I HAVE FOR THIS
SPREAD BE FIFTY FOUR FIFTY FOUR
.
SO THERE'S A SUGGESTION HERE TO
STRIKE THIS SO IF YOU WROTE
THIS PLEASE SPEAK UP UM I WOULD
STRIKE EXISTING AFFORDABLE
UNITS ARE AN IMPORTANT RESOURCE
MUST BE SAFEGUARDED TO MAINTAIN
AFFORDABILITY FOR RESIDENTS AND
ALSO SUPPORT SUSTAINABILITY BY
SAVING IN PART EMBODIED
CARBON .
THAT WAS ME.
YEAH I THINK I THINK THERE'S A
LOT OF NUANCE THAT YOU WOULD
NEED TO UNDERSTAND TO DETERMINE
WHEN IT WOULD MAKE SENSE TO
SAVE TO PRESERVE EXISTING UNITS
AND WHAT ACTUALLY MIGHT MAKE
SENSE TO BUILD NEW ONES.
ALEPPO'S GO.
SO I THINK JUST KIND OF LIKE A
BLANKET ASSUMPTION THAT WE
SHOULD ALWAYS BE PRESERVING THE
EXISTING AFFORDABLE UNITS AND I
DON'T KNOW WHETHER THOSE ARE
CITY OPERATED HOUSING
COMMISSION AFFORDABLE UNITS OR
OTHER ONES.
SO I THINK THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT WE WANT TO MAINTAIN
AFFORDABILITY.
WE WANT WE CERTAINLY WANT TO
MAINTAIN EXISTING
AFFORDABILITY.
BUT I MEAN AGAIN, I THINK THAT
THE EMBODIED CARBON STATEMENT
IS ALSO PRETTY HARD BUT I DON'T
THINK IT'S ALWAYS THE CASE THAT
IT MAKES SENSE TO KEEP AN
EXISTING BUILDING THAT'S VERY
OLD AND DRAFTY AND RIGHT.
YEAH.
SO I HAVE YEAH.
BUT SINCE I'M TRYING TO KEEP
TALKING I'LL STOP TALKING.
I ALSO WASN'T SURE ABOUT LIKE
WAIVERS AND INCENTIVES AND AND
THEN IN THE END IT ALL JUST
CAME DOWN TO LIKE REDUCING
MAINTENANCE COSTS FOR
SUSTAINABILITY AS IT DID AGAIN
MAYBE SMASHING TOGETHER
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
SUSTAINABLE INTO ONE STRATEGY
AND THIS COULD BE TEASED OUT
PERHAPS.
>> SO I WAS ALSO PRESENT IN
THIS SECTION IF YOU'RE READY.
>> YEAH, OK, SO AT ONE POINT
FOUR I THINK PART OF WHAT I WAS
HOPING THIS WOULD COVER ARE
THINGS LIKE ARE THERE AND I
DON'T KNOW WHERE WE WOULD PUT
THIS BUT ARE THERE PLACES WHERE
WE COULD WAIVE THE CERTAIN
REQUIREMENTS IN THE UDC FOR
AFFORDABLE LIKE THE OPEN SPACE
REQUIREMENT OR SOME OF THE
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS?
SO THIS SEEMED TO BE FOCUSING
IN A DIFFERENT DIRECTION.
>> SO I GUESS THAT'S THAT'S
ANOTHER QUESTION ABOUT LIKE
SPECIFICITY, RIGHT?
BECAUSE IT IS SAYING EXPEDITE A
PROCESS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AND THAT DOES TYPICALLY MEAN
OK, SO ANY TWENTY FIVE YEARS
YOU'RE GOING TO FIT IN REDUCING
THE OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS,
THE SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN
THAT POLICIES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION.
>> WELL I GUESS THAT'S MY
QUESTION IS DO WE WANT TO LIST
THOSE SPECIFICALLY?
IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE ASKING
OF THOSE THINGS TO BE LISTED
SPECIFICALLY HERE?
I DON'T I PERSONALLY DON'T NEED
IT TO BE THAT SPECIFIC.
>> OK, THAT IS THE DIRECTION WE
HAVE FORCED FROM MY POINT
OF VIEW THE UDC FORCES
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPERS
INTO PED'S.
>> WHY WOULD WE WANT TO HOLD
OUR CURRENT DEVELOPERS TO A
DISTINCT OPEN SPACE THAT HAS
BEEN AFFORDABLE HOUSING?
>> SO THAT THAT IS A WONDERFUL
QUESTION FOR A LEGISLATIVE BODY
TO HAVE.
BUT FOR ME, SOMEONE WHO HOUSES
THE HOUSE PEOPLE IN THEIR
CHURCH EVERY YEAR TWENTY FIVE
OF THEM I WANT TO DO WHATEVER
WE CAN TO PROVIDE MORE HOUSING
SO THAT THE HOUSE CAN BE HOUSED
AT PART OF THE CHALLENGE THERE
IS THE REGULATORY HURDLES THAT
THEY HAVE TO GO THROUGH IN
ORDER TO DO THAT AND THE FACT
THAT THEY HAVE TO BUILD CAPITAL
STACKS USING SUBSIDIES WITHIN
THE STATE TO BUILD THAT WHICH
ALREADY MAKES THEIR PROCESS
MORE COMPLICATED.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY AS A
COMMUNITY WE WOULDN'T LOOK AT
THAT AND SAY FOR THESE SPECIFIC
CASES.
SO IF A MARKET DEVELOPER CAME
AND WANTED TO BUILD AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THEY WOULD BE ABLE TO
TAP INTO THAT MUCH LIKE THE
SUSTAINABILITY OF BONUSES THAT
WE HAVE IN OUR UDC.
SO THAT THAT THAT'S JUST HOW
I'M THINKING ABOUT AS I'M
TALKING TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPERS AND UNDERSTANDING
THE CHALLENGE THAT THEY HAVE IN
OUR ENVIRONMENT.
>> SO JUST PASSING THAT ON I
GUESS I GET THAT BUT THE SAME
BENEFITS WOULD GET TO
ATTAINABLE HOUSING IF WE
PROVIDED THE FLEXIBILITY ACROSS
THE BOARD.
I WASN'T MR LEONARD, YOU AND I
I THINK AGREE THAT WE SHOULD DO
SOME ZONING.
YEAH THAT'S GOING TO BE MY
PLAN.
>> YES I CAN I WRITE THE
FORWARD DO YOU LEASE YOU FEEL
HERE WITH IT IS OK AND THEN
WHILE WE'RE HERE ON FIFTY FIVE
CAN I HELP US OVER.
UM LET ME SEE I DON'T SO WELL
WE CAN GET TO FIFTY FIVE AFTER
I DO SEE LIKE I HAVE A FEW
BULLET POINTS HERE ABOUT HOW TO
HANDLE THE EMBODIED
CARBON THAT'S MENTIONED HERE IN
STRATEGY ONE POINT THREE AND I
THINK THE MAIN TAKEAWAY IS
PEOPLE ARE SAYING LOOK THIS IS
THE FIRST TIME YOU'VE MENTIONED
YOU DON'T EXPLAIN WHAT IT IS.
SO I HAVE PUT THAT IN THE
GLOSSARY TO BE DONE.
BUT IF IT'S IN THE GLOSSARY,
ARE YOU OK WITHIN HERE?
DO YOU WANT IT EXPLAINED HERE
OR JUST STRACHWITZ?
YEAH.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO ME THIS
FEELS A LITTLE BIT LIKE THIS IS
LANGUAGE THAT'S SUPPORTING WHAT
WE ARE ALREADY ATTEMPTING TO DO
WHICH IS IMPORTANT FOR A
COMPLEX AND AND SO THAT'S GOOD
BUT IT DOES SOME THINGS LIKE BY
SAVING EMBODIED CARBON THAT
FEEL A LITTLE BIT LIKE WHAT IN
THE MIDDLE OF I DON'T KNOW IT
JUST YEAH.
>> IT SEEMS LIKE WE COULD
STREAMLINE THIS.
YEAH.
AND WE'VE HAD A COUPLE
OF COMMENTS AS WE'RE GOING
THROUGH THIS.
I THINK ONE OF THE TENSION
WE'RE HEARING IS THAT THAT I'M
HEARING FROM SOME OF YOUR
FEEDBACK IS THOSE VALUES THE
AFFORDABILITY, SUSTAINABILITY,
EQUITY.
WE FOUND THEM THROUGH OUR
DIALOG BUT THEY WERE REALLY
INTERRELATED AND AND THE
HOUSING THE STRATEGIES
OF HOUSING CAN'T NOT THINK
ABOUT SUSTAINABILITY.
BUT I THINK I I'M STRUCK BY
THAT WAS REALLY INTENTIONAL FOR
US TRYING TO RECOGNIZE THAT
TRANSPORTATION DECISIONS HAS
EQUITY AND SUSTAINABILITY
MEASURES.
HOUSING POLICY HAS
TRANSPORTATION AND
SUSTAINABILITY MEASURES AND
EQUITY MEASURES.
BUT I THINK GENERALLY THOSE
REFERENCES ARE COMING ACROSS AS
SORT OF CLOSED UP TO THIS
BOARD.
>> NO, I THINK PREVIOUSLY WHAT
WE SAY WHEN WE TALK DENSITY TO
TRANSIT FOR AND FOR ABILITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY THAT MAKE SENSE
TO ME HERE MAYBE I WOULD SAY WE
WANT ALL HOUSING TO BE MORE
SUSTAINABLE AND ALSO WE WANT TO
INCREASE THE AMOUNT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> RIGHT.
I THINK YEAH, I'M NOT I'M NOT
SURE THAT PRESERVING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IS A GOOD SUSTAINABLE
STRATEGY FOR US.
>> THAT'S THE QUESTION EXACTLY
.
>> THAT'S WHAT IT GETS REALLY
GOOD FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
WE'RE GETTING LOTS SO LET'S
SEPARATE THOSE YOU JUST HEAR
EXACTLY KNOW SO THAT THE
CLARITY ON WHETHER YOU MEAN
INCOME, QUALIFIED, AFFORDABLE
RIGHT HERE BECAUSE THAT'S
EXACTLY RIGHT.
MAKING SURE THAT WE BUY THOSE
AND KEEP THEM AFFORDABLE WHEN
WE CAN DO THAT IS VERY CRUCIAL
FOR AFFORDABILITY.
BUT IT THAT THE THE EMBODIED
CARBON POINT IS A POINT THAT
ONE WOULD THAT IS NOT SPECIFIC
TO AND ACTUALLY USUALLY NOT
NECESSARILY RELEVANT IN THE
CONTEXT OF A DISCUSSION
OF SHOULD WE BY LOWERING
TARIFFS.
THAT'S NOT WHY WE WERE BUYING
THE TARIFFS AND SO IT CONFUSED
THE EMBODIED CARBON POINT HERE
MAKES ME CONFUSED ABOUT WHICH
SORT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT BECAUSE I
DO AGREE THAT PRESERVING
EXISTING INCOME QUALIFIED OR
WHATEVER WE'RE CALLING IT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS REALLY
IMPORTANT.
>> THIS IS AN ARGUMENT FOR LIKE
NOT TEARING DOWN ANYTHING TO
BUILD ANYTHING MORE DENSE
BECAUSE WE'RE SAVING INVITING I
MEAN IT'S KIND OF LIKE WHAT OUR
LAST SPEAKER WAS SAYING.
LIKE I SAID, YOU COULD USE IT
EITHER WAY.
>> I THINK HERE THE MOST
IMPORTANT PART IS LIKE
MAINTAINING EXISTING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS AND THEY SHOULD
BE SAFEGUARDED AND IT DOESN'T
REALLY HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH
IT THEN I WOULD ALSO SAY AT THE
END AT THE VERY END OF ONE
POINT FOR YOU YOU DON'T JUST
TALK ABOUT EXISTING CAPITAL, A
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS.
YOU TALK IT TALKS ABOUT
PRESERVING NATURALLY OCCURRING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WHICH FEELS
LIKE IF WE WANT TO DO THOSE
THINGS, THOSE THINGS
FIT
TOGETHER.
AND SO I DON'T UNDERSTAND IF WE
CUT OUT EMBODYING CARBON FROM
NO ONE POINT THREE, THEN WHAT
ARE WE ACTUALLY SAYING IN ONE
POINT THREE THAT WE'RE NOT
SAYING IN ONE POINT FOUR AND
THEN MAYBE WE COMBINE I JUST
WOULD NOT WANT US TO I'M
NERVOUS ABOUT THE NATURALLY
OCCURRING AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
I COMPLETELY AGREE THAT IT
EXISTS.
I BUY THE ARGUMENTS ABOUT BUT
IT'S A IT'S PART OF A WHOLE
SEPARATE THEORY OF HOW HOUSING
BECOMES AFFORDABLE, WHICH IS
MARKET RATE HOUSING BECOMING
MORE AFFORDABLE AS IT AGES,
WHICH IS A DIFFERENT ARGUMENT
THAN ARGUMENT THEN THAT WE NEED
TO BUY EXISTING INCOME
QUALIFIED AFFORDABLE USER UNITS
SO IF THERE'S A LOT MATCHED IN
HERE AND I'M NOT CLEAR WHAT THE
FOCUS OF THE PARAGRAPH IS AND I
DON'T THINK WE SHOULD USE IT
EVEN IF WE SPELL IT OUT
NATURALLY OCCURRING AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IT'S NOT ENOUGH TO
OBVIOUSLY WE DON'T WANT TO SAY
NO BUT WE NEED TO REALLY DEFINE
THAT AND NOT JUST IN A GLOSSARY
BECAUSE THAT'S A THAT'S THE
THEORY ABOUT I MEAN SOME PEOPLE
WOULD ARGUE THAT THAT'S NOT
NATURALLY OCCURRING AT ALL,
THAT IT EXISTS BY VIRTUE OF ,
YOU KNOW, OTHER OTHER THINGS
THAT HAVE TO GO ON LIKE IT'S
LIKE WE DON'T HAVE A WHOLE LOT
OF NATURALLY OCCURRING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RIGHT NOW IN
ANN ARBOR BECAUSE WE HAVE
CONSTRAINED SUPPLY SO MUCH THAT
WE'RE NOT THE THINGS ARE AGING
BUT THEY'RE NOT ACTUALLY
BECOMING MORE AFFORDABLE
BECAUSE WE HAVE SUCH HIGH
DEMAND AND SO THIS IS JUST A
VERY BIG THEORY POINT I THINK.
>> AND SO I'M NOT AND IT ALSO
AGAIN IT'S CONFUSING ME ABOUT
WHAT IS OUR WHAT IS OUR GOAL
HERE?
>> WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO OFFSET
CITY SUSTAINABILITY
REQUIREMENTS?
>> NOT NOW.
THERE'S A LOT IN TWO PARAGRAPHS
THAT SHOULD PROBABLY BE MORE
THAN TWO PARAGRAPHS THEN
REWORDED TO POINT OUT THAT A
LOT OF FOLKS THAT HAVE BEEN
COMING IN AND VERY AFRAID
OF LOSING ARE SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS HAVE
BEEN ARGUING THAT THOSE THAT'S
AFFORDABLE HOUSING THEY'RE
GOING TO READ THIS AND NOT
UNDERSTAND THAT IT'S TALKING
ABOUT INCOME QUALIFYING
AFFORDABLE.
YEAH, THAT'S ABSOLUTELY WHY WE
HAVE TO DISTINGUISH BETWEEN
AFFORDABLE AND ATTAINABLE AND
WHEN WE MEAN INCOME QUALIFIED
WE HAVE TO RIGHT.
>> THAT IS WHAT NEEDS TO SO ONE
POINT FOUR I THINK MEANS INCOME
ELIGIBLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
WELL ONE POINT THREE TWO DOES
ISN'T IT AS WELL ONE POINT
THREE SHOULD TWO EXISTING
INCOME QUALIFIED AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS ARE AN IMPORTANT
RESOURCE BECAUSE I DON'T
NECESSARILY AGREE THAT EXISTING
ATTAINABLE HOUSING UNITS
BECAUSE ATTAINABLE TO WHOM YOU
KNOW IT'S ATTAINABLE TO ME
BECAUSE I'VE LIVED IN IT.
I BOUGHT IT IT WAS
CHEAP BECAUSE PFIZER JUST LEFT
AND I DON'T PAY TAXES ON IT BUT
IT'S REALLY SCREWING SARAH WHO
LIVES IN IPSI AND WANTS TO MOVE
IN TO ANN ARBOR SO THAT ONE IS
HARDER.
>> SO THIS IS A LOT HARDER.
>> I MEAN THIS IS A LOT OF WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT, RIGHT IS
THAT PEOPLE ARE WORRIED THAT
THEY WILL BUY A SMALL FAMILY
HOME AND REPLACE IT WITH FOUR
UNITS AND THEY'RE SAYING WELL
THOSE FOUR UNITS BECAUSE
THEY'RE NEW BUILDS MIGHT BE
MORE EXPENSIVE THAN THE HOUSE
THEY REPLACED.
>> BUT IN FIFTEEN YEARS BECAUSE
THIS PLAN GOES TO TWENTY FIFTY,
DOES IT BECOME NATURALLY
OCCURRING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
FOR MORE PEOPLE BECAUSE THERE'S
FOUR UNITS THERE.
>> YEAH WELL WE WOULD REALLY
NEED TO EXPLAIN THAT THEORY.
I DON'T THINK WE CAN JUST PUT
IT THERE AND SAY ARE YOU ALL ON
BOARD WITH THAT'S THAT'S A LOT
OF THAT'S A CONCERN BUT THAT IS
ALSO A SORT OF A PART OF THIS
LONGER TERM PLAN IS THAT YES.
MORE DENSITY MIGHT BE MORE
EXPENSIVE WHEN IT FIRST BUILDS
BECAUSE IT'S A BRAND NEW BUILD.
THAT'S THE PART OF THE
EXPLANATION FRONT AND THE
RATIONALE THAT NEEDS TO BE PUT
OUT AND EXPLAINED NEVER SHOULD
BE EXPLAINED THERE ALONG WITH
THE OTHER LITERATURE THAT
SHOWING THAT BUILDING MORE
SUPPLY WILL HAVE AN EFFECT ON
YOU ON THE AVAILABILITY AND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING WHICH IS
WHAT WE ARE LONG TERM IN THE IN
THE SHORT TERM IN THE WAY THAT
I'VE HEARD YOU EXPLAIN IT FOR
MICHEL IS THAT IT'S CHEAPER
BECAUSE THERE'S MORE UNITS
THERE THAN THERE WERE BEFORE.
>> SO IT'S PER UNIT THE THE PER
UNIT COST EVEN IF THE SALES
PRICE IS HIGH ON EACH OF THOSE
FOUR THINGS THE THE THE
RELATIONSHIP OF LAND TO UNIT WE
HAVE GOTTEN CHEAPER.
WE'VE GOTTEN MORE OF IT.
YOU DID IT.
I CAN'T DO IT.
YOU DID IT REALLY WELL.
>> I DON'T RECALL IF THAT WAS
ME OR NOT BUT YOU BECAUSE YOU
IT WAS AT THE LOW BUPA TOWN
HALL OK, BUT THESE TWO BULLET
POINTS ARE NOT SPEAKING.
NO.
AND THEY'RE NOT SPEAKING TO
LESS EXPENSIVE SMALL SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES THEY'RE SPEAKING
TO PUBLICLY SUBSIDIZED LESS
THAN WORKFORCE HOUSING.
SO I THINK THERE'S SOME
CONFUSION BECAUSE WE'RE USING
AFFORDABLE TO PROMISCUOUSLY
THAT'S NOT THE RIGHT WORD TO
LOOSELY.
YEAH.
AND MAYBE WE NEED TO BE A BIT
MORE CAREFUL BECAUSE IF WE USE
IT LOOSELY PEOPLE WILL READ IT
TO MEAN WHAT THEY WANT IT TO
MEAN AND THEN AND THEN SAY WELL
WHY AREN'T YOU LETTING ME
PROTECT MY HOUSE?
IT'S AFFORDABLE, IT'S EXISTING
AFFORDABLE AND YOU JUST SAID
RIGHT HERE WE SHOULD BE
PROTECTING IT AND SAFEGUARDING
.
SURE.
OK, I DON'T WANT TO BE CLEAR
THOUGH.
>> PEOPLE ARE MAKING AN
ARGUMENT AS IF THEY HAVE NO
RIGHT AS TO WHEN AND WHETHER
THEY WANT TO SELL THEIR HOME
THERE.
YEAH, YEAH.
I KNOW THERE IS A LOT OF LIKE
MY HOUSE WILL GET BULLDOZED
IMMEDIATELY AND IT'S LIKE WELL
YOU HAVE YOUR PRIVATE PROPERTY
RIGHTS IF YOU WANT TO SELL YOUR
HOME OR NOT.
>> YEAH.
AND THEY MAY AT SOME POINT AND
THEY MAY WANT TO IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT'S BEEN A
CONCERN WHERE PEOPLE ARE REALLY
UPSET ABOUT SOMEBODY ON ANOTHER
PROPERTY BUT WHEN THEY GO TO
SELL THEIR HOUSE THEY DO
THEY'RE REALLY UPSET THAT IT'S
NOT GOING FASTER AND THERE ARE
MORE OPPORTUNITIES AND THE
PRICES AND HIGHER OR SO I THINK
IT RIGHT.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
PEOPLE UNDERSTAND THAT THEY
DON'T HAVE TO SELL THEIR HOUSE
IF THEY DON'T WANT TO AND THAT
I THINK THEY'RE WORRIED THAT
THE PRESSURE WILL BE TOO GREAT.
RIGHT.
IF IF THEY MIGHT GET AN OFFER
THEY CAN'T REFUSE, WELL THEN
ZONING IS ZONING IS
CONTRIBUTING TO THAT BECAUSE
WE'RE MAKING LAND MORE VALUABLE
BY ALLOWING MORE DENSITY ON
THEIR ON THEIR ON THEIR LAND.
>> SO ON.
>> YES.
SPECIFICALLY ON SECTION ONE
POINT THREE AND ONE POINT FOUR.
YES.
THE ONE POINT OF CLARIFICATION
I HAD WAS IN THE FINAL AND THE
CITY SHOULD CONSIDER INNOVATIVE
SOLUTIONS SUCH AS WAIVERS AND
INCENTIVES.
WE'VE BEEN WE'VE OFTEN TALKED
ABOUT INCENTIVES, BONUSES,
THINGS OF THAT NATURE
OF SIMPLIFYING THE ZONING
CODE .
>> RIGHT.
IS THIS SPECIFIC?
>> NOT NECESSARILY THE ZONING
RIGHT.
THE CITY SHOULD CONSIDER
INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS TO REDUCE
THE COST OF MAINS AND REPAIR.
IS THAT INTENDED TO BE
SOMETHING THAT THE ZONING
RELATED OR SOMETHING THAT IS
LIKE A PROGRAM THAT THE CITY
SHOULD?
>> I THINK IT'S GETTING TO THIS
POINT THAT WE'VE BEEN TOUCHING
ON WHICH IS THAT ZONING IS ONE
TOOL AND THERE ARE THINGS
OUTSIDE OF THAT THAT WE COULD
EXPLORE.
OK, GOT IT.
OH THANK YOU.
SO IT SEEMS LIKE IF I WERE TO
SUMMARIZE KIND OF THE
COMMISSION'S SENTIMENTS ON ONE
POINT THREE AND ONE POINT FOUR,
IT SEEMS THAT WE JUST NEED TO
BE VERY SPECIFIC ABOUT WHAT
AFFORDABLE ACTUALLY MEANS.
RIGHT OF IS AFFORDABLE GOING TO
THE INCOME CONSTRAINTS THAT'S
YEAH.
>> YES.
OH MY GOD.
>> BY THE WAY.
SO I'VE AGREED THAT WE SHOULD
BE USING THE QUALIFIERS TO BE
SPECIFIC SO THAT THERE ISN'T
ANY MISINTERPRETATION AGAIN I
COME BACK TO HOW THIS PLAN GETS
USED IN THE FUTURE RIGHT.
WITH PEOPLE KIND OF POINTING AT
SPECIFIC SENTENCES AND SAYING
WELL HOW IS OPERATIONALIZED?
>> SO DO YOU THINK YOU HAVE
ENOUGH ON ONE BY THREE BEFORE?
>> YES.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S KEEP MOVING TO ONE POINT
FIVE NOW.
>> UM, DO I HAVE ANYTHING FOR
ONE POINT FIVE?
LET'S SEE.
YEAH.
HOW LIKELY IS THIS TO ACTUALLY
THE CITY SHOULD REGULARLY
CALIBRATE STUDENT AND HOUSING
GOALS WITH UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN ENROLLMENT AND
EMPLOYMENT LEVELS?
YEAH, SORRY I GOT A LOT I WENT
OVER TO THE UNIVERSITY, CAME UP
AND LIKE PARTNERING WITH THE
CITY.
I'M JUST IS THAT REALLY THIS
RATIONAL LIKE THIS THIS
SENTENCE EVEN MAKES IN HERE?
WELL I WOULD ARGUE THAT WE
SHOULD DO THIS SO SURE.
BUT LIKE THAT'S I THINK THAT'S
PEOPLE LIKE THEIR UNIVERSITY
KEEPS ADDING LIKE ALL OF THESE
STUDENTS AND DON'T WORK WITH
THE CITY THE PUBLIC.
SURE.
OF COURSE WE SHOULD.
>> IS THAT EVER GOING TO
ACTUALLY HAPPEN?
IT JUST DOESN'T REALISTIC TO
ME.
>> I THINK THAT THERE ARE
ACTUALLY IS A LOT
OF COORDINATION THAT OCCURS.
IT JUST MAY NOT ACTUALLY HAVE
THE OUTCOMES THAT WE THINK ARE
MEASURABLE BUT A LOT OF THE I
THINK THE INTENT OF THIS TO SAY
THAT THERE SHOULD BE REGULAR
CALIBRATION IS THEY ARE
INEXTRICABLE RIGHT FROM THE
TURNING DOWN RELATIONSHIP SO
I'M OK WITH THE SENTENCE BEING
IN HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT,
ARE YOU SAYING THAT I MEAN LIKE
WHATEVER BUT THERE IS A POINT
LIKE THIS SHOULD IS ON THE
WRONG FOOT.
IT'S MORE LIKE THE UNIVERSITY
SHOULD COOPERATE WITH THE CITY.
>> THERE'S MORE WITH IT.
WE CAN'T MAKE ACTIONS OR AN
OUTSIDE AGENCY.
RIGHT.
WE CAN ALWAYS WE COULD JUST NOT
USE THE SHOULD IF THERE'S
ANOTHER WORD WE COULD USE THAT
DOESN'T MAKE IT FEEL LIKE IT'S
ALL IN THE CITY.
>> IT'S ON THE STREET TO DO
RIGHT LIKE WE TRY ALL THE TIME
BUT I DON'T KNOW THAT HOW WE
COLLABORATE WITH THEM THAT THEY
CAN BE DISTINCT SHOULD WE
REGULARLY LOOK AT OUR THEIR
STUDENT, OUR STUDENT AND
HOUSING GOALS RELATED TO THEM
AS AN INSTITUTION?
THEY MAY FRANKLY NOT
PARTICIPATE IN THAT BUT YOU
ARE
ONE OF THE THINGS WE KNOW FROM
THEIR PLAN IS THEY DON'T PUT
PROJECTIONS ABOUT WHAT THEIR
ENROLLMENT IS.
>> THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT WE
SHOULDN'T MONITOR THAT WHEN
WE'RE REVISITING OUR PLAN TO
SEE HOW OUR PLAN SHOULD REFLECT
THEM BECAUSE WE'VE ALREADY
ESTABLISHED VERY DEPENDENT UPON
THEM NOT AS AN INSTITUTIONAL
ECONOMY BUT AS A HOUSING MARKET
DRIVER.
>> HOW DO YOU MONITOR IF
THEY'RE GOING TO BE FORTHCOMING
WITH IT?
>> WELL, THEY PUBLISHED AT
LEAST DATA WE HAD JUST AFTER WE
READ IT AFTER THE FACT.
WELL, DID YOU PUT A MONITOR IN
THE SENTENCE BECAUSE THAT DOES
FEEL LIKE SOMETHING WE COULD
DO.
>> YEAH, YEAH.
I'M READING IT WITH UH I DON'T
KNOW SORT OF LIKE AS IF WE'RE
YOU KNOW, MAKING CLEAR THAT
THAT'S AN INPUT FOR US TO DO
OUR PART.
>> YES, I AGREE.
JUST ONE SUPERBOOK QUESTION
ABOUT CAN YOU CHECK ON THE
EXISTING SUBSIDIZED HOUSING
THAT UM IN OUR HOUSING FOR
EVERYONE HAS A LOT OF HOUSING
AND THEY REFLECTED IN HERE THEY
ARE BUT THE UNIT THAT WAS IT IN
THE VOUCHERS.
>> YEAH, THE UNIT COUNTS ARE
GOING TO BE SMALLER SO THE
WHOLE GROVE IS 50 YOU KNOW
THEY'RE ALL I MEAN ALL OVER I
JUST DIDN'T KNOW IF THEY WOULD
IF IT WAS THEY WERE THEY WERE
COUNTED IN VOUCHERS OR HOUSING
.
>> THEY HAVE GOT TO HAVE IT ALL
SO MY COMMENTS ARE I'M FIFTY
.
FIVE AND THE PRESIDENT'S BOX I
SO MY COMMENTS ARE I'M FIFTY
GOT THESE WERE THIS WAS THE ONE
FIVE AND THE PRESIDENT'S BOX I
PLACE THE WHOLE DOCUMENTARY WAS
GOT THESE WERE THIS WAS THE ONE
LIKE WHY IS THIS HERE LIKE MY
PLACE THE WHOLE DOCUMENTARY WAS
OWN PERSONAL REACTION I KNOW A
LIKE WHY IS THIS HERE LIKE MY
LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE HAD THAT BUT
OWN PERSONAL REACTION I KNOW A
THIS WAS THE FIRST TIME I HAD
LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE HAD THAT BUT
IT AND I WOULD HAVE LOVED TO
THIS WAS THE FIRST TIME I HAD
HEAR ABOUT POOR LIVING HOUSING
IT AND I WOULD HAVE LOVED TO
THAT'S ALREADY IN THE CITY.
HEAR ABOUT POOR LIVING HOUSING
WE HAVE THE FORMATION OF A
THAT'S ALREADY IN THE CITY.
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS THAT IS
WE HAVE THE FORMATION OF A
COMING FORTH INSIDE THE CITY
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS THAT IS
AND I DON'T KNOW ABOUT THE THE
COMING FORTH INSIDE THE CITY
TEACHER HOUSING THING.
AND I DON'T KNOW ABOUT THE THE
I DON'T THINK THAT'S GOING TO
TEACHER HOUSING THING.
EVER BECOME A BIG THING.
I DON'T THINK THAT'S GOING TO
>> BUT SO THERE ARE WAYS TO
EVER BECOME A BIG THING.
JUST USE LOCAL THINGS AND IF
>> BUT SO THERE ARE WAYS TO
NOT, CAN WE JUST GET RID OF IT
JUST USE LOCAL THINGS AND IF
BECAUSE THIS WAS MY FIRST LET'S
NOT, CAN WE JUST GET RID OF IT
GET THE DOCUMENTS.
BECAUSE THIS WAS MY FIRST LET'S
LET'S GET RID OF IT.
GET THE DOCUMENTS.
OK, GREAT.
LET'S GET RID OF IT.
THANKS TO EVERYONE.
OK, GREAT.
>> THAT'S GREAT.
THANKS TO EVERYONE.
OK, SO THIS IS ONE EXAMPLE
>> THAT'S GREAT.
OF HOW OTHER COMMUNITIES HAVE
OK, SO THIS IS ONE EXAMPLE
PARTNERED WITH LOCAL AND
OF HOW OTHER COMMUNITIES HAVE
REGIONAL WRITERS.
PARTNERED WITH LOCAL AND
I LIKE I SAID I JUST HAD THAT
REGIONAL WRITERS.
REACTION SO I CAN BE A SINGULAR
I LIKE I SAID I JUST HAD THAT
VOICE WHICH CAN BE IGNORED.
REACTION SO I CAN BE A SINGULAR
>> YEAH I MEAN I MEAN I DON'T
VOICE WHICH CAN BE IGNORED.
REALLY UNDERSTAND WHY IT'S
>> YEAH I MEAN I MEAN I DON'T
THERE.
REALLY UNDERSTAND WHY IT'S
>> I MEAN THEY'RE HANDY BUT
THERE.
THIS IS THE ARE THEY HANDY FOR
>> I MEAN THEY'RE HANDY BUT
OUR DOCUMENT OR ARE THEY HANDY
THIS IS THE ARE THEY HANDY FOR
AT THE TIME WHEN IT SAYS TO
OUR DOCUMENT OR ARE THEY HANDY
IMPLEMENT STRATEGY ACROSS LOCAL
AT THE TIME WHEN IT SAYS TO
AND REGIONAL PARTNERS LIKE IT
IMPLEMENT STRATEGY ACROSS LOCAL
FEELS LIKE MORE LIKE IT'S A
AND REGIONAL PARTNERS LIKE IT
PLANNING DOCUMENT FOR POSSIBLY
FEELS LIKE MORE LIKE IT'S A
IN FIVE YEARS WE'RE GOING TO BE
PLANNING DOCUMENT FOR POSSIBLY
LIKE OK, HOW TO WHO SHOULD WE
IN FIVE YEARS WE'RE GOING TO BE
COORDINATE LIKE HOW SHOULD WE
LIKE OK, HOW TO WHO SHOULD WE
COORDINATE US?
COORDINATE LIKE HOW SHOULD WE
AND THEN YOU WOULD LOOK AT THIS
COORDINATE US?
AND BE LIKE WHY DON'T YOU LOOK
AND THEN YOU WOULD LOOK AT THIS
INTO THE CHAPLAIN HOUSING TRUST
AND BE LIKE WHY DON'T YOU LOOK
AND GET MORE EXAMPLES MAYBE I
INTO THE CHAPLAIN HOUSING TRUST
PROBABLY GOOGLE IT YEAH AND WE
AND GET MORE EXAMPLES MAYBE I
CAN BUT WE CAN GET RID OF IT.
PROBABLY GOOGLE IT YEAH AND WE
I MEAN I SAW WE WERE HEARING A
CAN BUT WE CAN GET RID OF IT.
LOT OF COMMENTS AND PUBLIC
I MEAN I SAW WE WERE HEARING A
COMMENTS ABOUT COMMUNITY LAND
LOT OF COMMENTS AND PUBLIC
TRUST AND SO ACTUALLY I THOUGHT
COMMENTS ABOUT COMMUNITY LAND
THAT THIS WAS THE WAY TO LIKE
TRUST AND SO ACTUALLY I THOUGHT
OH NOW I SEE WHERE THAT IS.
THAT THIS WAS THE WAY TO LIKE
BUT SHE DIDN'T LIKE AND SO IT'S
OH NOW I SEE WHERE THAT IS.
NOT THE IT'S NOT LOCAL EXAMPLE
BUT SHE DIDN'T LIKE AND SO IT'S
NECESSARILY.
NOT THE IT'S NOT LOCAL EXAMPLE
IT'S LIKE HOW MIGHT IT WORK IN
NECESSARILY.
ANOTHER PLACE?
IT'S LIKE HOW MIGHT IT WORK IN
AND THAT ALLOWED ME TO SEE THE
ANOTHER PLACE?
PARALLEL HERE.
AND THAT ALLOWED ME TO SEE THE
SO OBVIOUSLY I'M NOT GOING TO
PARALLEL HERE.
DIE ON THAT ONE.
SO OBVIOUSLY I'M NOT GOING TO
I AM ON THE SIDE OF TRYING TO
DIE ON THAT ONE.
SIMPLIFY THE PLAN IF IT HAS A
I AM ON THE SIDE OF TRYING TO
MATERIAL KIND OF GRAVITAS
SIMPLIFY THE PLAN IF IT HAS A
TOWARDS THE INTERPRETER.
MATERIAL KIND OF GRAVITAS
I MEAN BECAUSE IT KIND OF FEELS
TOWARDS THE INTERPRETER.
LIKE A TEXTBOOK IT'S GIVING
I MEAN BECAUSE IT KIND OF FEELS
DIFFERENT EXAMPLES.
LIKE A TEXTBOOK IT'S GIVING
BUT HOW CREATE A VISIT TO THE
DIFFERENT EXAMPLES.
KIND OF INTENSIVE GOALS AND
BUT HOW CREATE A VISIT TO THE
STRATEGIES OF THE OVERALL PLAN?
KIND OF INTENSIVE GOALS AND
>> RIGHT.
STRATEGIES OF THE OVERALL PLAN?
THESE ARE GREAT, GREAT
>> RIGHT.
EXAMPLES.
THESE ARE GREAT, GREAT
>> THEY CAN BE IN THE TOOLKIT
EXAMPLES.
OF THINGS I JUST I'M OF THE
>> THEY CAN BE IN THE TOOLKIT
MINDSET OF REDUCTION OF WORDS
OF THINGS I JUST I'M OF THE
THAT AREN'T ACCRETIVE THAT
MINDSET OF REDUCTION OF WORDS
OVERALL WILL IMPROVE CLARITY
THAT AREN'T ACCRETIVE THAT
AND ACCESSIBILITY.
OVERALL WILL IMPROVE CLARITY
REMEMBER, I THINK OUR INTERNAL
AND ACCESSIBILITY.
AH DISCUSSIONS WERE ABOUT HOW
REMEMBER, I THINK OUR INTERNAL
WE MAKE THE STOCK MORE
AH DISCUSSIONS WERE ABOUT HOW
APPROACHABLE.
WE MAKE THE STOCK MORE
THE MORE WORDS ARE THE LESS THE
APPROACHABLE.
PROGRAM.
THE MORE WORDS ARE THE LESS THE
I LOOK AT THIS PAGE AND I KIND
PROGRAM.
LOOK AT JUST THE NUMBER SO I'M
I LOOK AT THIS PAGE AND I KIND
ON THE SIDE OF ACTUALLY
LOOK AT JUST THE NUMBER SO I'M
REDUCTION SO I'M TOTALLY WITH
ON THE SIDE OF ACTUALLY
YOU.
REDUCTION SO I'M TOTALLY WITH
>> I'M JUST CURIOUS FOR
YOU.
EVERYONE ELSE IF THERE'S A
>> I'M JUST CURIOUS FOR
PLACE WHERE WE WANT TO MENTION
EVERYONE ELSE IF THERE'S A
THE COMMUNITY INTEREST IN HERE
PLACE WHERE WE WANT TO MENTION
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THIS MIGHT
THE COMMUNITY INTEREST IN HERE
BE THE ONLY PLACE AND SO MAYBE
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THIS MIGHT
THAT NEEDS TO BE WORKED INTO
BE THE ONLY PLACE AND SO MAYBE
THE DESCRIPTION OF ONE POINT
THAT NEEDS TO BE WORKED INTO
FIVE AND I AS A POSSIBLE
THE DESCRIPTION OF ONE POINT
STRATEGY OR PARTNER TO
FIVE AND I AS A POSSIBLE
COLLABORATE WITH.
STRATEGY OR PARTNER TO
>> YEAH, AND I AGREE THAT THAT
COLLABORATE WITH.
REFLECTS A LOT OF THE COMMENTS
>> YEAH, AND I AGREE THAT THAT
THAT WE HAVE HEARD.
REFLECTS A LOT OF THE COMMENTS
AND SO TO THE EXTENT THAT WE
THAT WE HAVE HEARD.
ARE AGAIN STRENGTHENING AND
AND SO TO THE EXTENT THAT WE
REFLECTING THE COMMUNITY
ARE AGAIN STRENGTHENING AND
FEEDBACK THAT WE'RE GETTING,
REFLECTING THE COMMUNITY
I'M SUPPORTIVE OF THAT.
FEEDBACK THAT WE'RE GETTING,
>> AS FOR THIS PARTICULAR
I'M SUPPORTIVE OF THAT.
SECTION, I'M I WOULD THINK THAT
>> AS FOR THIS PARTICULAR
TRYING TO CREATE BREVETTI YEAH
SECTION, I'M I WOULD THINK THAT
.
TRYING TO CREATE BREVETTI YEAH
>> WE NEED TO TAKE ABOUT I
.
DON'T THINK SO.
>> WE NEED TO TAKE ABOUT I
>> I THINK THERE'S AGREEMENT TO
DON'T THINK SO.
TRY TO REMOVE AND ADD COMMUNITY
>> I THINK THERE'S AGREEMENT TO
LAND TRUST TO ONE POINT FIVE
TRY TO REMOVE AND ADD COMMUNITY
PERCENT POTENTIAL PARTNER.
LAND TRUST TO ONE POINT FIVE
YEAH A MENTION OF IT CHAIR YES.
PERCENT POTENTIAL PARTNER.
WE TAKE A BREATH DREW BACK OR
YEAH A MENTION OF IT CHAIR YES.
SHOULD I JUST LEAVE THAT UM
WE TAKE A BREATH DREW BACK OR
JUST GO INTO THE AND ALSO I
SHOULD I JUST LEAVE THAT UM
JUST WONDERED I WANTED TO DO A
JUST GO INTO THE AND ALSO I
CHECK IN ON TIME SO IT'S BEEN
JUST WONDERED I WANTED TO DO A
THREE AND A HALF HOURS.
CHECK IN ON TIME SO IT'S BEEN
YEAH.
THREE AND A HALF HOURS.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE HERE
YEAH.
ANOTHER THREE AND A HALF HOURS
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE HERE
.
ANOTHER THREE AND A HALF HOURS
>> LET'S SEE HOW ARE YOU.
.
SO WHAT IF YOU WANT TO THINK
>> LET'S SEE HOW ARE YOU.
ABOUT THE SCHEDULE WE DO HAVE
SO WHAT IF YOU WANT TO THINK
UM SORT OF LIKE AN EXTRA ROOM
ABOUT THE SCHEDULE WE DO HAVE
AT THE VERY END WHERE IT WAS
UM SORT OF LIKE AN EXTRA ROOM
JUST MEANT TO WRAP UP ALL
AT THE VERY END WHERE IT WAS
OF OUR FINAL EDITS.
JUST MEANT TO WRAP UP ALL
SO POTENTIALLY THAT YOU COULD
OF OUR FINAL EDITS.
USE THAT AS A FILLER IF YOU
SO POTENTIALLY THAT YOU COULD
JUST WANT TO FINISH HOUSING
USE THAT AS A FILLER IF YOU
TONIGHT AND THEN WE'D HAVE TO
JUST WANT TO FINISH HOUSING
REPUBLISH IT BECAUSE WE TOLD
TONIGHT AND THEN WE'D HAVE TO
PEOPLE WE'D GO OVER THESE NEXT
REPUBLISH IT BECAUSE WE TOLD
SECTIONS BUT LIKE THERE IS ALSO
PEOPLE WE'D GO OVER THESE NEXT
SORT OF A FOR A MEETING IF YOU
SECTIONS BUT LIKE THERE IS ALSO
ALL WANT TO DECIDE TONIGHT WHEN
SORT OF A FOR A MEETING IF YOU
YOU WANT TO STOP THE TABLE YOU
ALL WANT TO DECIDE TONIGHT WHEN
WANT TO GET WE'RE KIND OF SPLIT
YOU WANT TO STOP THE TABLE YOU
UP.
WANT TO GET WE'RE KIND OF SPLIT
I DON'T NECESSARILY I LIKE THAT
UP.
EXTRA MEETING.
I DON'T NECESSARILY I LIKE THAT
OK, WHY DON'T WE TAKE FIVE
EXTRA MEETING.
MINUTES REAL QUICK JUST TO TAKE
OK, WHY DON'T WE TAKE FIVE
A BREATHER AND THEN LET'S
MINUTES REAL QUICK JUST TO TAKE
RECONVENE THINK ABOUT YOUR
A BREATHER AND THEN LET'S
ENERGY LEVELS AND THEN LET'S
RECONVENE THINK ABOUT YOUR
JUST THANK YOU.
ENERGY LEVELS AND THEN LET'S
>> THANK YOU.
JUST THANK YOU.
WE'LL BE BACK IN FIVE AT NINE
>> THANK YOU.
TEN
OK.
WE ARE MOVING ON TO NOW PAGE
FIFTY SIX AND FIFTY SEVEN AND
NOW WE ARE INTO STRATEGY
SUPPORT ALL RESIDENTS ACCESS
AND QUALITY HOUSING MITIGATE
DISPLACEMENT FOR LOW AND
MODERATE INCOME.
OK UM THE FIRST OUT THAT I HAVE
HERE IS ACTUALLY WELL THE FIRST
GROUPING I HAVE IS ABOUT
INVENTORY OF CURRENT PROJECTS
UM TWO POINT TWO THERE WERE A
FEW COMMENTS ABOUT HOW WHY ARE
WE JUST SAYING WHAT WE DO
SHOULD THERE BE MORE HERE?
UM I WAS ONE OF THOSE COMMENTS
SAME I MEAN THREE OK THERE WE
GO.
UM WE DON'T WANT TO SPEAK TO
HOW YOU'D LIKE TO SEE THIS
UPDATED.
WELL I JUST LIKE I WOULD DO
SUCH A THING LIKE IF WE'RE
ALREADY DOING THIS BECAUSE IT
SAYS WE SHOULD CONTINUE LIKE
CAN WE NAME THOSE PROGRAMS?
ARE THEY WORKING LIKE I JUST
FELT LIKE IT WAS DIDN'T REALLY
SAY MUCH.
>> I ALSO THOUGHT THAT IF THE
BALDFACED STRATEGY IS TO
INCREASE THEN IT'S MORE THAN
JUST CONTINUING IT'S DOING
SOMETHING NEW.
>> YEAH OK.
>> THE FACT THAT THIS IS ONE
SENTENCE YEAH IT I'VE GOT THIS
LATER ON TOO LIKE I FEEL LIKE
WHEN WE MAKE SOME THINGS VERY
LONG AND SOME THINGS EXTREMELY
SHORT IT SENDS A MESSAGE EVEN
IF THAT'S NOT AN INTENTION.
>> SO UM OK I THINK IF WE LOST
SOME OF THESE PROGRAMS DISCUSS
THOSE THAT THIS WOULD BE UP
THAT SECTION OK YEAH UM BECAUSE
WE COULD MAYBE DO THOSE
PROGRAMS LIKE WE HAVE THE OTHER
PROGRAMS IN THE BOXES THAT WE
DIDN'T LIKE BECAUSE THEY WERE
NOT OUR PROGRAMS BUT MAYBE WE
COULD PUT OUR PROGRAMS IN SOME
OF THOSE BOXES O OR SIMILAR
BOXES BUT DON'T THERE'S A
CHANCE THAT WE DON'T KNOW THE
EXACT OUTCOMES OF EVERY SINGLE
PROGRAM THAT WE'VE HAD.
>> RIGHT.
SO JUST MORNING UM OK GOT IT.
>> UM I THINK THE NEXT BIG
GROUPING HERE IS PARK SO THAT
WOULD BE FIFTY PAGES FIFTY
FIFTY NINE SORRY THE DID YOU
KNOW BOX WHICH THERE'S ONLY TWO
I JUST WANT TO MAKE A GENERAL
COMMENT BUT I WOULD ADMIT THESE
BOXES AND TRYING TO WORK THEM
IN ELSEWHERE AND WE'RE GOING TO
BE MORE CONSISTENT WITH LIKE
THE CALL OF THE PRESIDENT A
BUNCH DID YOU KNOW THEY WERE
TWO SO I WOULD SAY EITHER MAKE
MORE OR JUST THERE'S A WAY TO
INTEGRATE THIS INTO THE TEXT.
>> THE JUST SORT OF FELT LIKE
WE GOT HAVE WE HERE.
>> BUT IT'S INTERESTING IF THE
GOAL IS TO MITIGATE
DISPLACEMENT THEN STRATEGIES
FOR MITIGATING DISPLACEMENT
SHOULD BE SHOULD BE IN THE
STRATEGIES AS OPPOSED TO THE
DID YOU KNOW YEAH.
>> LIKE THOSE WERE ANTI
DISPLACEMENT POLICY SOLUTIONS.
>> YEP.
GOT IT.
SO THE IDEA WOULD BE TO ON THE
THIRD YOU KNOW INTEGRATE THEM
INTO THE TEXT AND THE BODY
OF TWO POINT ONE THROUGH TWO
POINT THREE.
>> OK COOL.
ALL RIGHT LET'S KEEP MOVING THE
GOAL NUMBER THREE ON PAQUES
RIGHT.
UM WHERE TO START HERE?
UM SO SOMEONE HAD SUGGESTED
STRIKING THIS SENTENCE ON PAGE
FIFTY EIGHT SOME OF THE DENSEST
AREAS OF THE CITY SUCH AS
DOWNTOWN HAVE LIMITED PARK
SPACE.
THIS PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR ACTIVITY AND CONNECTION
ALONG THE HURON RIVER CORRIDOR
.
I MEAN I SUMMARIZE THAT BUT
THAT WAS THE AREA THAT THEY
WANTED REMOVED.
>> UM, SO ANYONE WANT TO SPEAK
TO THAT?
>> WELL, AUNT AUNT I DIDN'T
QUITE KNOW HOW TO INTERPRET IT
BUT HOW I INTERPRETED IT IN MY
HEAD WAS OH THIS IS TALKING
ABOUT THE TREE LINE TRAIL.
I DIDN'T KNOW I DIDN'T TAKE IT
AS THIS MEANS YOU SHOULD MAKE A
PARK IN DOWNTOWN BUT RATHER
THAT WE SHOULD ENABLE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE DOWNTOWN TO CONNECT TO
A GREEN SPACE AND ENABLE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE ON THE NORTH SIDE TO
GET DOWNTOWN FASTER.
YES, I DON'T THINK THAT THIS IS
TRYING TO RELITIGATE THE PARK
DOWN.
NO, I DIDN'T THINK YOU ALL YEAH
.
>> BECAUSE I HEARD BECAUSE I
READ IN STRENGTHEN ACTIVITIES
AND CONNECTIONS.
YEAH.
SO MAYBE IF WE MENTIONED THE
TREE LINE TRAIL IN THERE THAT
COULD BE GOOD.
>> YEAH.
AND ALSO THE THING THAT THAT
THAT GOT MADE ON MAIN STREET
THAT BIG TUNNEL THAT HAPPENED
WE COULD MENTION THAT WE MADE
THAT ONE AND I DON'T KNOW IT'S
CALLED DENHA INSTRUMENTAL
TUNNEL THAT'S ACROSS FROM THE
BART THE BART BUT YOUR HEART
PARDON THEM ISN'T IT AAGOT I
DON'T YEAH.
MEAN IT'S A STATION IS WHERE
EVERY SINGLE UNDERPASS I GO
DOWN THERE THAT'S IT.
YEAH THE TO BE YEAH THE B2B SO
WE WANT TO TALK THEN ABOUT THE
B2B TRAIL AND THE TREE LINE
TRAIL.
>> THOSE ARE THE CONNECTIONS TO
STRENGTHEN ESPECIALLY SINCE THE
TREE LINE PLAN IS PART OF THE
TOLL OF COMP PLANS.
GOOD WORK.
OK UM THREE POINT ONE THERE'S
ALSO A COMMENT ABOUT UM I SO
HOW ARE WE DEFINING OUR QUALITY
AND HOW ARE YOU DEFINING
UNDERSERVED?
SO AGAIN THIS IS A DIFFERENT
EXAMPLE RIGHT OF WHAT WE MEAN
BY UNDERSERVED UNDERSERVED IN
THIS CONTEXT IS ABOUT LIKE
ACCESS TO PARKS.
UM WHICH MIGHT BE DIFFERENT IF
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT UNDERSERVED
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT HOUSING
SUPPLY.
>> UM DO WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT
POOR QUALITY?
THERE'S A FEW QUESTIONS THAT
ARE SORT OF ABOUT THIS LIKE UM
UH I MADE ONE OR A COUPLE
OF THEM AND I THINK THIS MAYBE
COMES LATER WE SAY FOCUS ON
QUALITY AND AT SOME POINT MAYBE
IT'S OUT ON THIS PAGE.
BUT SOMETHING ELSE IS LIKE
FOCUS ON QUALITY, NOT QUANTITY
.
BUT THEN THIS MAP IS ONLY
SHOWING BIG PARKE'S QUANTITY
RATHER THAN QUALITY.
AND SO I WAS REALLY CONFUSED
AND WHO DETERMINED FIVE ACRES
WAS THE RIGHT THRESHOLD AND UH
SO YEAH.
AND IT SOUNDS LIKE IT LOOKS
FROM THE THINGS OTHER PEOPLE
HAD THAT SAME THING.
I REALLY I REALLY LIKE THE
CROSSHATCH OF LIKE THE PLACES
WHERE WHERE PEOPLE DON'T HAVE
CARS BECAUSE THEN YOU WOULD
DEFINITELY WANT TO BE ABLE TO
WALK TO THINGS LIKE PARKS THAT
ARE CLOSE AND YEAH BUT I ONLY
PARKS THAT ARE OVER FIVE ACRES
WHERE WE HAVE FROM PARKS
DEPARTMENT OR DO YOU KNOW WHAT
THAT DECISION WAS MADE?
>> I DON'T KNOW.
IT MIGHT BE JUST BECAUSE IT'S
LIKE CERTAIN LIKE A CERTAIN
SIZE AND ALSO FROM OUR BASE.
>> YEAH IT ALSO LOOKS
INACCURATE THERE WAS A HUGE
WHAT IS THAT GOLF YOU HAVE GOLF
COURSES LIKE GREEN PARKS
UNDER
FIVE ACRES BUT IT'S EXCLUDING
UM GOLF COURSES AND CEMETERIES.
BUT I DIDN'T I DIDN'T READ THAT
AND THEY GO IN THE PARKS AND
THE FIVE ACRES MAYBE WOULD JUST
EXCLUDE THAT LIKE THEY IT DOES
NOT EXIST ON THE MAP WHERE THEY
SHOULD BE A DIFFERENT WHY ARE
THEY THERE.
>> OH YEAH YEAH I DON'T SEE
YEAH THAT MAKES ARE THEY THERE.
>> THEY'RE THE GOLF COURSES
THEY'RE OH YEAH THERE'S
SOMETHING ELSE GOING ON WITH
THIS MAP THERE'S BIG GREEN ONES
THAT LOOK BIGGER THAN FIVE
ACRES SO I'M TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT THAT IS.
>> I THINK SO I DON'T THINK
THOSE ARE ACTUALLY GOLF COURSES
AND CEMETERIES THAT WERE JUST
BUMPED INTO THE LIGHT GREEN.
THEY ACTUALLY SHOULD BE EITHER
A DIFFERENT COLOR OR ELIMINATED
BECAUSE THEY ARE AVAILABLE TO
THE PUBLIC PARKS IS ACTUALLY
CEMETERIES ARE ANYWAY.
SO THE FEEDBACK IS CAN WE GET
THAT GRAPHIC?
JUST LOOK THAT ONE MORE TIME
JUST TO ENSURE ACCURACY.
YEAH, THANKS.
SO YOU WANT TO JUST DO YOU WANT
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE GOLF COURSES
DISTINGUISH SOMETHING PUBLIC?
WE HAVE PUBLIC COURSES THAT ARE
ACCESSIBLE.
ARE YOU TRYING TO SOMEHOW
DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN PUBLIC
FACILITIES THAT HAVE LIKE A
COST ASSOCIATED OTHER I JUST
DON'T WANT A GIANT GOLF COURSE
LISTED AS A COLOR THAT
CORRESPONDS IN THE KEY TO
SOMETHING THAT SAYS PARK UNDER
FIVE ACRES.
OK, I GUESS IT DEPENDS ON WHAT
STORY YOU TRYING TO TELL WITH
THIS MAP.
>> THEY'RE TRYING TO SHOW
ACCESS LEVEL THE ACCESS RIGHT
TO LARGER WALKABLE.
YEAH YEAH
YEAH.
>> SO I MEAN WE CAN LOOK AT THE
LEGEND BUT I FEEL LIKE THERE IS
ANOTHER MAP MAPPING PARKS MAYBE
THERE'S A MAP THAT THAT MAPS
NATURAL FEATURES UM PUBLIC
NATURAL FEATURES.
>> SO SORRY I'M JUST THINKING
TO WALK SCORE WELL THAT'S NOT
THAT'S SHOW BUSINESS NETWORKS
SO THE NOTE IS YOU THINK
THERE'S SOME INACCURACIES ABOUT
WATER UNDER AND OVER FIVE ACRES
?
>> I THINK IT'S UM NO NO I
THINK IT'S JUST THAT I THINK
THAT THEIR LEGEND IS WEIRD.
THEY PUT IN THE DARK GREEN THAT
THEY'RE EXCLUDING THOSE
CEMETERIES AND GOLF COURSES AND
SO THEY WOULD THE SHOWING IN
THE LIBRARY BUT THEY'RE SHOWING
IT IN LIBRARY AND SO THEY COULD
MOVE THAT NO, BUT IT'S ALSO
JUST LET'S CAN WE JUST GET SOME
CLARIFICATION ON THAT?
>> WE JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE OTHER MESSAGING IS
CLEAR.
>> UM, ALSO JUST THIS ONE IS A
YES.
>> THIS IS A LITTLE PICKY.
SORRY.
OH AT THE SAME TIME THE VERY
LARGE QUANTITY OF PUBLIC LAND
AND THE MANY FACILITIES MIX
MAINTENANCE CAPEX A CHALLENGE
MY PREFERENCE THIS IS IN THE
MIDDLE OF THREE POINT ONE OR
THE SECOND THE LAST SENTENCE
JUST I DON'T THINK THE
QUALIFIERS OF EXTREME OR VERY
LARGE ARE NECESSARY IN THIS
KIND OF A DOCUMENT.
THE VERY LARGE QUANTITY
OF PUBLIC OWNED AND JUST THE
LARGE I THINK IS SUFFICIENT
JUST FROM A IT'S SUPPOSED TO BE
KIND OF MORE OF A FORMAL
DOCUMENT SAYING SOMETHING IS
VERY LARGE IS NOT NECESSARY.
>> THERE'S BETTER SUCCINCT WAYS
TO DO THAT.
THERE'S A FEW PLACES WHERE IT
SAYS EXTREME OR EXTREMELY LOW
OR VERY LARGE AND SO I JUST
CALL IT LARGE OR LOW OR SO
ASIDE FROM THAT ON THREE POINT
TWO I THINK IT JUST AH WE PLAN
ON KEEPING AS IN HERE THE PLAN
DOES NOT REFLECT OR IS THIS IS
THAT GOING STAIRS THAT GETTING
REMOVED JUST I THINK THAT'S UP
TO YOU ON UP TO KEEP THE THE
THING HIGHLIGHTED IN BLUE THIS
PLAN DOES NOT SEEM THAT HERE IS
WHERE I'M GOING TO BE BRUTALLY
HONEST AND SAY I'M NOT LOOKED
AT THE PARKS RECREATION OPEN
SPACE PLAN BUT NOT ALL OPEN
SPACES OPEN SPACE ARE NOT PARKS
IN OPEN SPACE ARE DIFFERENT
THINGS THAT I'M GUESSING THAT
PLAN GOES INTO MUCH GREATER
DETAIL ABOUT THE DIFFERENT
KINDS OF PARKS AND OPEN SPACE
AND THIS IS PRETTY VAGUE AND
NOT GOING INTO THAT DETAIL.
SO IF WE REMOVE THAT CONNECTION
THEN WE NEED TO BEEF THIS UP
QUITE A BIT IF WE KEEP THE
CONNECTION THAT'S ANOTHER PART
OF IT.
YEAH.
THEN WE SHOULD KEEP THE NOTE
HERE THAT CONNECTION I THINK
HAVING THAT CONNECTION IS
IMPORTANT TO MENTION SHOULD BE
DONE MAYBE JUST NOT IN A WAY
THAT'S LIKE NO MAYBE IT CAN BE
INTEGRATED.
>> YEAH BUT I REALLY THOUGHT
THAT THAT THAT WAS LIKE A
PLACEHOLDER BECAUSE IT LOOKS
DRAFTY AND TOPOGRAPHICALLY
WEIRD CONTENT WISE.
IT'S IMPORTANT.
IT'S IMPORTANT YEAH.
I WOULD HAVE A CALL OUT FOR AND
THIS IS NOT THE ONLY PLACE
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT A COUPLE
OF OTHER THINGS TO WHERE WE
WERE REFERENCING OTHER PLANS
AND I THINK THAT THAT WOULD BE
REAL HELPFUL.
ANYTHING ELSE ON THREE POINT
ONE?
ACTUALLY WE DID.
I BELIEVE THAT THIS WOULD BE A
GOOD PLACE TO CALL IT BOX THAT
JUST SUMMARIZES QUICKLY WHAT
THAT PLAN DOES AND HOW THE
PROPOSED PLAN YEAH.
>> YEAH I DON'T KNOW MUCH MORE
THAN A COUPLE OF SENTENCES BUT
JUST KIND OF HIGHLIGHTS THAT
ONE JUST CHANGES FOR YOUR INFO
THAT WOULD THEY DO CHANGE THAT
EVERY FIVE YEARS YOU CAN SAY
WHAT IT'S ABOUT AND THE FACT
THAT IT'S DONE EVERY FIVE YEARS
BUT LIKE I I THINK WE'VE I
THINK WE'VE ADOPTED AT LEAST
TWO YEAH.
>> WE CAN BROADLY STATE WHAT IT
DOES BUT LIKE YOU SAID BECAUSE
EVERY FIVE YEARS THEY DO LIKE A
MASSIVE INVENTORY WHERE THEY
WRITE THE CONDITION THAT EVERY
SINGLE THING AND EVERY SINGLE
PART AND SO WE JUST BLAMING
YEAH OK, ANYTHING ELSE HERE PUT
THAT IN THERE INSTEAD OF THE
PART GET RID OF THE QUOTE AND
JUST PUT THE BOX QUOTES FROM
THE QUOTES ROBOTS ARE GONE AND
EVERYONE'S OK WITH IT AT A HIGH
LEVEL CONTINUE TO MAINTAIN HIGH
QUALITY PARK RECREATIONS ALONG
WITH LAND USE PATTERNS AND
FOCUS ON QUALITY EQUITY AND
ECOLOGICAL BENEFIT IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF OPEN SPACE.
>> EVERYONE'S OK WITH THE LARGE
BROAD STROKES OF THAT STRATEGY
.
>> HMM.
IF YOU ARE ON OXFORD COMMONS
LET US KNOW NOW BECAUSE THE
CITY ACTUALLY USES A P OR
SOMETHING THAT DOESN'T HAVE
OXFORD COMMAS SO WHATEVER IS
CONSISTENT USE THE I'M A PRO
OXFORD I HAVEN'T SEEN YOU'RE
ALSO THE SAME I THINK IN ANSWER
TO CHARLIE QUESTION ABOUT THE
GENERAL EQUITY THING I THINK I
AM IN AGREEMENT WITH IT AS LONG
AS WE MAINTAIN THAT THE DENSITY
IS GOING TO BE CITYWIDE BECAUSE
MY NEIGHBORHOOD HAS ACCESS TO A
LOT MORE PARKS THAN OTHER
NEIGHBORHOODS AND I ACTUALLY
WANT MORE PEOPLE TO BE ABLE TO
HAVE ACCESS TO WHAT WE HAVE
ACCESS TO SO THAT WE ARE NOT
PARTICIPATING IN OPPORTUNITY
HOARDING SO AS LONG AS WE KEEP
THAT TRAJECTORY THEN I I AGREE
WITH THAT STATEMENT BUT IF
SOMEWHERE WE'RE GOING TO CHANGE
THAT THEN I THINK WE ARE GOING
TO ACTUALLY EMBED OPPORTUNITY
FOR SOME AND EXCLUDE
OPPORTUNITY FOR OTHERS BECAUSE
WE'RE GOING TO DENY DENSITY IN
PLACES WHERE THERE IS AN
ABUNDANCE OF PARKS.
ARE YOU REFERRING TO THE
SENTENCE WHERE IT SAYS
PARTICULARLY IN HIGH DENSITY
AREAS THAT NO, I WAS ACTUALLY
JUST ANSWERING TANTALIZE
GENERAL QUESTION.
HE WAS ASKING A HIGH LEVEL
QUESTION FOR THIS SPREAD.
DO WE ALL AGREE AND I WOULD SAY
YES AS LONG AS WE ALSO CONTINUE
WITH DENSITY CITYWIDE.
OH, OK.
BECAUSE IF WE EXCLUDE SOME
NEIGHBORHOODS, NEIGHBORHOODS
THAT HAVE ACCESS TO RICH PARKS
LIKE MINE THEN RIGHT THEN WE
DON'T DENSIFIED THEM.
>> WE'RE NOT ACTUALLY SAYING
WHAT WE'RE GOING FOR IN THE
GOAL.
I JUST WANT US TO BE CONSISTENT
IF THAT'S ALL.
>> OK, ONE FINAL QUESTION FOR
ME BEFORE WE MOVE ON TO GOAL
NUMBER FOUR, I'M LOOKING AT THE
QUOTE ON THE MIDDLE OF THAT
YELLOW BANNER WHERE WE'RE ALL
CLOSE.
WE DECIDED LET ME THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> JUST FOLLOW UP.
OK, GREAT.
SORRY.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S MOVE ON TO A GOAL FOR
ENCOURAGE WALKABLE CONNECTED
NEIGHBORHOODS WITH ACCESS TO
BASIC NEEDS AND AMENITIES.
>> OK, PAGE SO THIS IS PAGE
SIXTY.
I MEAN I THINK THAT THESE NOTES
ARE SMALL ENOUGH THAT WE COULD
MAKE IF YOU SEE THE THREE HERE
ON PAGE EIGHT, THE BOTTOM THREE
PAGE SIXTY UM WE CAN DISCUSS OR
I BROUGHT UP THE THERE WAS A
FEW ABOUT THE SAN DIEGO EXAMPLE
REMOVING THAT WHICH IS IN LINE
WITH OUR OTHER COMMENTS.
>> WE'D LIKE TO REMOVE THAT.
I DON'T KNOW IF I SENT IT BUT I
THINK I WANTED TO CHANGE
COMMUNITIES TO NEIGHBORHOODS IN
FOUR POINT ONE.
>> OH IT'S YES.
>> IS THAT NOT LISTED HERE?
I KEPT MY OK UP THIRD THING ON
PAGE NINE.
>> OH HOW CAN YOU MAKE SURE
YOU'RE ON SARASIN OH GIVE YEAH.
POLITICS TO GET UH WHAT ELLIE
WAS TALKING ABOUT IS LIKE THE
SECOND PART THAT SAYS PAGE
SIXTY ON PAGE NINE PAGE NINE
THIRD THING DOWN THANKS.
>> OK I'M JUST GOING TO LIKE
RETURN TO MY WE'RE GOING TO SAY
THINGS ARE WE'RE HISTORICALLY
UNDER INVESTED AND LIKE
UNDERUTILIZED I WANT TO FIND IT
AND EXPLAIN OR SHOW WHERE WAS
THEIR AGREEMENT TO REMOVE THE
SAN EXAMPLE.
YES YEAH I WAS ALSO THERE'S
ANOTHER PROGRAM PROVIDES DIDN'T
REALLY MATCH THE SUGGESTION
THAT WAS BEING GIVEN TO ME I
THINK WHEN I READ IT WHICH NOW
I'M TIRED.
>> SO IS THERE A PROGRAM THAT
IS A DIFFERENT PRESIDENT.
GREAT OTHERWISE YOU JUST CUT IT
BUT I DON'T LIKE YEAH.
>> AND WHILE I REALLY DO
APPRECIATE THE KIND OF LIKE
POINTING OUT OTHER COMMUNITIES
AND WHAT THEY'VE DONE
, IT'S
LESS THE THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
IS SAYING THAT THAT IS
SOMETHING WE SHOULD DO.
>> I THINK IT CREATES KIND
OF LIKE A NORMATIVE AUTHORITY.
WE SHOULD LOOK AT PROGRAMS THAT
DOES THIRTY REVIEWS AND
INCENTIVIZE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
FOR TRANSIT UNLESS THAT KIND
OF NORMALLY NORMATIVELY BEING
PRESCRIBED.
I THINK MAKES IT MORE
CONFUSING.
>> RIGHT.
SO IF IT'S JUST A DID YOU KNOW
IT'S LIKE THANK YOU.
>> YEAH.
SO IT WAS I THINK NEEDS TO BE
ACCRETIVE TO PERFECTION.
>> OK AND THAT SAID THIS IS THE
ONE PLACE FOR THE DID YOU KNOW
PORTION I THINK IS ACTUALLY
SUPER HELPFUL BUT ALSO WELL
THAT'S SPECIFIC TO THAT YEAH.
YEAH.
AND SO I THINK THAT'S WHERE THE
DID YOU KNOWS ON THE REFERENCES
TO THE DIFFERENT POINTS.
YEAH I THINK THAT THAT SHOULD
BE A LITTLE BIT MORE TO CREATE
KIND OF DIRECTIONAL POINTS
TOWARDS EXISTING OTHER PLANS.
THE ONLY KIND OF LIKE
SUBSTANTIVE COMMENT I HAVE IS
VISION ZERO IS FOCUSED ON
TWENTY MINUTE NEIGHBORHOODS.
WHY DO WE HAVE TEN OR FIFTEEN
ALL OVER THE DOCUMENT.
RIGHT AND TO CREATE KIND
OF LIKE A CERTAIN LEVEL
OF CONSISTENCY OR AT LEAST WE
SHOULD HAVE GOOD EXPLANATION
KIND OF BEHIND IT BUT JUST YOU
KNOW YEAH YEAH.
>> LIKE I THINK DEPARTMENTS ARE
USING DIFFERENT ONES AND WE'RE
PULLING FROM ALL OF THEM SO
WE'LL HAVE TO FIND ONE
CONSISTENT ONE I DON'T KNOW AND
PERKS'S THERE'S A TEN MINUTE
WHY PAKSAS AND THAT'S THE EASY
ONE.
>> ANY ACCESS TO LIKE ACTUAL
LGER OR BASIC GOODS AND THINGS
OF THAT NATURE.
>> OK, WELL IN SO LONG AS WE
HAVE ALIGNMENT ON THAT BUT I DO
LIKE THE DID YOU KNOW ON THAT
JUST YEAH I AGREE LIKE THE DID
YOU KNOW COULD ALSO BE LIKE DID
YOU KNOW ANN ARBOR IS ALREADY
DOING IS TO HELP PEOPLE NOT
LOSE THEIR HOMES OR LIKE IT
FITS IN A LOT OF THE THINGS
WE'VE ALREADY TALKED.
>> YEAH OK UM CAN I NOW.
OH YES YES SORRY HE WAS GOING
PAST FOUR POINT THREE REMOVE
AND COLLECTOR STREETS AND
CORNERS SO MY EXAMPLE OF WHERE
WE WANT SPECIFICITY AND WHERE
WE WANT THICKNESS I MEAN WE ARE
PEOPLE ARE A LITTLE NERVOUS
ABOUT HAVING COMMERCIAL USES IN
THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD AND AS
PEOPLE WHO HAVE TO RIGHT THE
ZONING ORDINANCE TO FIGURE OUT
WHERE THEY SHOULD GO.
>> WE WERE TALKING TO THE
CONSULTANT ABOUT WHAT WHAT
WOULD BE SOME CRITERIA THAT WE
COULD WORK WITH LATER WHICH ARE
WE DON'T WANT TO ZONE FOR
SOMETHING EVENTUALLY THAT'S NOT
GOING TO BE SUCCESSFUL.
SO WE WANT TO THINK ABOUT THE
STREET TYPOLOGY.
WE WANT TO THINK ABOUT THE SIZE
OF THE LOT WHERE IT'S LOCATED
IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO THESE ARE JUST THESE ARE
MEANT TO BE BROAD DIRECTIONS
FOR US WHEN WE WANT TO
INCORPORATE COMMERCIAL USERS
INTO A RESIDENTIAL AREA.
BUT I I HAVE A FEW COMMENTS TO
REMOVE IT.
I MEAN DO I GO NO.
NO, I'M GOING TO WAIT.
I MEAN I THINK WE'RE ALREADY
SEEING LIMITED SMALL SCALE
COMMERCIAL ALIGNING USE
RESTRICTIONS WITH COMMUNITY
DESIRE AND NEED THAT THOSE ARE
ALREADY VERY PRETTY SPECIFIC
AND I JUST THINK EVERYBODY
LOVES JEFFERSON MARKET NOW THAT
COLLECTOR STREET CORNER.
SO I JUST DON'T KNOW IF WE WANT
TO BACK OURSELVES INTO THAT
KIND OF RESTRICTION HERE.
THERE MIGHT BE OTHER WELL MAYBE
YOU COULD JUST SAY JUST BE LIKE
SOME WAYS THAT YOU COULD
CONSIDER REGULATIONS FOR THIS
ARE BUT ISN'T IT ALREADY I MEAN
I GUESS THE WAY TO DESCRIBED AS
BEING DESCRIBED LIKE MORE LIKE
A DAY CARE IS A AS OPPOSED TO
SOMETHING WHICH IS A PHYSICAL
AREA I DON'T KNOW BUT DOESN'T
THAT TO COME IN TO REMOVE IT
YOU ALL IF YOU WANT LESS
SPECIFICITY ON THIS PARTICULAR
UM AREA OR DIFFERENT SPECIFIC
OR DIFFERENT.
>> YEAH RIGHT.
YEAH I JUST I WAS ONE OF THE
COMMENTS TO REMOVE THE
COLLECTOR STREETS AND THE
CORNER UM CERTAINLY BECAUSE
OF JEFFERSON MARKET BUT WE HAVE
AN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN OUR
PRIMARILY RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD AND I COULD
IMAGINE A CORNER STORE BEING
DIRECTLY ACROSS THE STREET OR
THE PARKING LOT OF THE SCHOOL
BUT IT'S NOT A CORNER STORE
EVEN THOUGH THAT'S HOW WE WE
TEND TO TALK ABOUT THEM.
SO I JUST I FEEL LIKE BECAUSE
THIS IS A TWENTY FIVE YEAR LOOK
AHEAD I'D LIKE TO GIVE YOU MORE
FREEDOM TO PERMIT THESE LESS
FREEDOM TO PERMIT THESE OR
COULD BE QUALIFIED WITH
SOMETHING LIKE TYPICALLY ALONG
BUT I WOULD ALSO BE IN SUPPORT
REMOVING IT AS WELL.
UM SO SO THAT YOU COULD HAVE
SOME LEVEL OF WIGGLE ROOM.
>> I JUST DON'T WANT THERE TO
BE A TOTAL YEAH I'M I'M FINE
WITH THAT.
WE'RE JUST WE'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO FACE THE SAME
TENSION WITH RESIDENTS IS LIKE
YOUR LESS DETAIL THERE IS HERE
THE MORE THEY'RE GOING TO BE
CONCERNED ABOUT SO WHAT RIGHT
NEXT DOOR TO MY HOUSE THERE'S
GOING TO BE SOMETHING.
ARE THERE ANY RIGHT WHAT ARE
THE WHAT ARE THE CRITERIA OR
REGULATIONS GOING TO BE AROUND
THIS AND WE DON'T KNOW THE
ANSWER IS WE DON'T KNOW YET.
SO WE'RE JUST TRYING TO PUT IN
BROADLY LIKE HERE'S SOME THINGS
TO CONSIDER.
YEAH, WE CAN CONTINUE TO
CONSIDER THEM WHETHER THEY'RE
WRITTEN HERE OR NOT.
SO IF WE WANT TO REMOVE THEM
THAT'S FINE.
I JUST WANT YOU TO KNOW THAT
ANY TIME WE REMOVE MORE
INFORMATION AND CREATE ANYTHING
THAT'S LESS ANYTHING THAT'S
VAGUE IS IS HOW WE'RE GETTING
MORE COMMENTS.
>> BUT I WAS WONDERING HOW THIS
STRIKE PEOPLE STRIKE VOTERS
WOULD FEEL ABOUT TYPICALLY THE
ADDITION OF TYPICALLY ALONG THE
SO FEELS RESTRICTIVE AS IS WHY
IT'S FOCUSING ON LOCAL
COMMERCIAL USES IN
NEIGHBORHOODS UM ALIGNING USE
RESTRICTIONS WITH COMMUNITY
DESIRES AND NEEDS AND THEN THE
DESIGN COMES AROUND IN A CORNER
LOT STILL HAS A NEIGHBOR ON
EACH SIDE SO I DON'T SEE HOW WE
SOLVE THE PROBLEM OF OH IS IT
GOING TO BE NEXT DOOR TO ME
EVEN IF IT'S ON A CORNER IT'S
GOING TO BE NEXT DOOR TO YOU.
>> THAT ONE'S MORE ABOUT
VISIBILITY BUT YES SURE.
YEAH BUT SO IT DOESN'T SOLVE IF
THAT'S THE PRIMARY ANGST I
THINK WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT
WEED SHOPS HERE SO YOU KNOW MY
PEOPLE WILL BRING THAT UP.
>> I'M TO WEED SHOPS HAVE THEIR
OWN SET OF CRITERIA.
THEY CAN'T BE SO CLOSE TO
SCHOOLS THEY HAVE TO HAVE
WHATEVER OTHER RESTRICTIONS
THAT ARE IN THE DC.
SO I THINK THAT'S WHAT PEOPLE
ARE CONCERNED ABOUT IS LIGHT
COMMERCIAL COULD BE THAT OR IT
COULD BE A CAR REPAIR THAT OR
YEAH I DON'T KNOW A YOGA SHOP
THAT IS QUITE LOUD YOGA THEY
HAVE SO LOUD WHICH IS WHY I
THINK IF IT WERE ME I WOULD SAY
THIS IS NOT WHAT IT'S AGAIN IT
IS PAST MY TIME SO I I WAS NOT
GOING TO THEN REPEAT THAT I
HAVE THE QUESTION I WROTE THE
QUESTION LIKE WHAT DO WE MEAN
BY LOCAL COMMERCIAL USES
BECAUSE THAT'S GOING TO HAVE TO
BE SORTED OUT AND IF WE DON'T
DO IT NOW IT'LL HAVE TO BE IN
THE FUTURE AND BEING CLEAR TO
PEOPLE LIKE WE WOULD NEED TO
SORT OUT THINGS LIKE WHAT ABOUT
AS LOCAL COMMERCIAL USES AND
WHETHER THERE ARE LOCATION
RESTRICTIONS OR SPACE.
I MEAN YOU CAN ALSO SAY THAT I
DON'T WANT TO HAVE FIVE
BUSINESS LIKE YOU COULD IMAGINE
THAT THAT MIGHT BE SOMETHING
THAT WOULD MEET.
>> THE REALITY IS IT WILL NEED
TO BE SORTED OUT AT SOME AND SO
EITHER WE CAN SAY IT NOW AND BE
VERY EXPLICIT WE'RE GOING TO
SAY IT NOW.
I BET I WOULD VOTE TO LIKE SAY
THE KINDS OF THINGS THAT WE
KNOW WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
SORT OUT SO THAT AT LEAST
PEOPLE KNOW THAT WE ARE NOT
ANTICIPATING A FREE FOR ALL CAN
PASS EVERYBODY DAYCARE'S WELL
THAT'S THE THING THERE'S HOW
MANY WITNESSES DO YOU THINK ARE
IN THE UDC OF HEALTHY SMATTER
PAGES AND PAGES AND PAGES?
I WOULD HAVE TO BE SORTED
GROUPED LIKE, YOU KNOW,
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT OR LIKE
RESTAURANTS AND I'M NOT GOING
TO LIST YOU KNOW, SO LITTLE
COMMERCIAL MEANS FUMIGANTS
STUDIO THIS LANGUAGE IS GETTING
AT THE ANSWERS.
YEAH, THE BANKERS ARE MORE
INTERESTED IN US LISTING OUT
WHAT THE QUESTIONS WILL BE.
>> YES.
YEAH OK.
>> IS THAT FAIR?
YEAH I THINK SO BECAUSE THAT
WILL HELP BUT IT ALWAYS POINTS
TO THE JEFFERSON MARKET IS LIKE
THIS IS WHAT WE'RE THINKING.
ARE THERE OTHER EXAMPLES LIKE
AAGOT THE ARGO'S ARGUS
SNOBBERY.
YEAH PEOPLE SPECIFIC PLACES IN
THE PLANET DO WE HAVE CAN WE
SAY LIKE HERE ARE SOME EXAMPLES
OF THINGS WHERE THINKING YEAH
YEAH YEAH THERE ARE HAPPY
EXAMPLES WHERE IT'S ACTUALLY
WORKING BIG CITY BAKERY.
YEAH THAT'S A GOOD IDEA AND I
THINK IT'S FINE TO SAY WE LOVE
AFFAIRS ON COMMERCIAL.
>> I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR BUT
THEY FIT IN A NEIGHBORHOOD IN
THERE YOU KNOW.
YEAH.
SO WE'RE HEADING IN THAT
DIRECTION HERE THOUGH THIS PART
OF THE REASON WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT HERE IS LIKE ONE OF THE
THINGS IS WE WANT TO OPEN UP
THAT OPPORTUNITY EVERYWHERE IN
THE CITY AND THAT'S THE TENSION
THAT MICHELLE NAMING HERE.
RIGHT IS THAT WE CAN JUST STATE
THAT AND THAT'S THAT'S SORT
OF HOW I GOT IN TROUBLE WITH
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL.
RIGHT.
BECAUSE WHEN WE SAID WE'RE
ADDING DENSITY, WE INTEND TO
ADD TO YOUR NEIGHBORHOODS THAT
IS A VERY DIFFERENT VISION TO
SOME PEOPLE THAN OTHER PEOPLE.
>> AND SO YEAH, I I'M THINKING
WE'RE TALKING HERE ABOUT SMALL
COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS THAT
ACTUALLY SERVE THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> NO PARKING.
>> YES.
BECAUSE A LOT OF PEOPLE CAN
WALK YOU KNOW, A LOT OF THE
BUSINESSES FROM FOLKS WHO ARE
WALKING THEIR THERE ARE A
HANDFUL OF EXAMPLES AROUND
WHETHER THEY'RE I MEAN MOST
PEOPLE PROBABLY HAVE NO CLUE
WHAT THEY'RE ZONED FOR BUT THEY
KNOW THAT THEY'RE THEY'RE AND
THEY'RE SERVING THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THEY FIT.
>> I THINK WE COULD TALK ABOUT
SETTING NEIGHBORHOOD SERVING
COMMERCIAL THINGS AND WE NEED
TO FIGURE OUT WHAT THE CRITERIA
WILL BE THROUGH POLICY.
BUT HERE ARE SOME EXAMPLES
OF WHAT WE'RE THINKING
.
>> OK, THAT'S A GOOD DIRECT
IMAGE PICTURE CAN A THOUSAND
WORDS EXAMPLES AND QUESTIONS.
YEAH, EXAMPLES AND QUESTIONS
BUT ALSO NOT EVERYBODY IS GOING
TO BE OK WITH EVERYTHING THAT
COULD POSSIBLY BE THERE.
>> I MEAN I LIVE RIGHT ACROSS
FROM AN R FOR B ZONE COMMERCIAL
OPERATE.
>> I MEAN IT IS A COMMERCIAL
OPERATION AND USED TO BE A
TATTOO PARLOR WHICH NOW WOULD
BE OK BUT 40 YEARS AGO MAYBE
NOT SO MUCH BECAUSE THAT WAS
CONSIDERED A LITTLE AND THEN
YOU KNOW COULD HAVE BEEN A GUN
STORE AT SOME POINT WHICH NOW
WE WOULD SAY NO, THAT WOULDN'T
BE INAPPROPRIATE BUT I'M SAYING
LIKE NOW IT'S A JEWELRY STORE
SO LIKE I THINK, UH I THINK
JUST SAYING TO PEOPLE WELL IT'S
ONLY GOING TO BE SOMETHING LIKE
JEFFERSON MARKET IS ALSO NOT
BEING REALISTIC THAT THAT I
THINK WE NEED TO BE NOT NOT TO
SCARE PEOPLE BECAUSE CHANCES
ARE THESE ARE GOING TO BE
AWESOME.
>> BUT ALSO THAT IT'S NOT LIKE
LIKE IF WE SAY THAT IF WE'RE
TOO SPECIFIC OR NOT SPECIFIC
ENOUGH I MEAN IT'S THAT SAME
OLD THING OF LIKE IF WE SAY
IT'S ONLY GOING TO BE A BAKERY
THAT STARTS AT 10:00 IN THE
MORNING AND DOESN'T HAVE THE
GREASE AND DOESN'T HAVE YOU
KNOW, LIKE DONUTS AND SLEEP IS
I WOULD LIKE TO HAVE A DONUT
SHOP ACROSS FROM ME BUT THAT'S
ALTHOUGH I DO ACTUALLY HAVE
DONUT SHOP NOT TOO FAR FOR ME
THAT IS IN ANOTHER I MEAN SO UM
BUT BUT YEAH I MEAN I THINK
IT'S A LITTLE BIT HARD BECAUSE
IT'S BEING TOO SPECIFIC OR NOT
SPECIFIC ENOUGH QUESTIONS AND
EXAMPLES.
>> YEAH I GUESS SO IT'S GREAT.
>> LET'S GET TO THE YEAH THIS
IS THE END OF THE HOUSING AND
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> YES.
OH YES WE'RE ONE THIRD OF THE
WAY THERE.
>> YEAH ALL RIGHT.
ALTHOUGH THAT MIGHT BE A GOOD
REMINDER SORRY I JUST KNOW
WE'RE NOT ALL GOING TO GET
EXACTLY WHAT WE WANT FROM THIS
DOCUMENT.
THERE'S NINE OF US THERE'S
COUNCIL, THERE'S THE PUBLIC,
THERE'S STUFF UM LET'S TRY TO
KEEP OUR COMMENTS WHERE WE NEED
DISCUSSION.
WE NEED DISCUSSION.
>> BUT IF IT'S SOMETHING YOU
CAN LIVE WITH MAYBE WE FOR GO
YEAH.
>> HAVE A DISCUSSION ON THAT
AND WE REALLY FOCUS ON THE
AREAS THAT WE NEED TO CHANGE.
DOES THAT SEEM FAIR?
MM HMM.
YES.
OK, YEAH OK SO WHAT'S THE SIXTY
THREE.
SO LET'S GO TO SIXTY FOUR I
THINK THERE WAS A COMMENT HERE
THOUGH SAME THING WITH THE
OBJECTIVES SAME COMMENTS HERE
IS THAT THOSE CAN BE TIED INTO
STRATEGIES UM I'M SORRY CAN I
GET UP TO 60 HERE REAL QUICK
BECAUSE THIS FOR ALL OF THE
OPENINGS I THINK IS JUST A
GENERAL COMMENT.
THEY'RE NOT CHAPTERS RIGHT.
SO THE GOALS IN THESE CHAPTERS
INCLUDE I THINK I SENT YOU THAT
COMMENT.
I JUST THINK THAT NEEDS TO BE
REWARDED AND I JUST WANT TO
MAKE SURE I UNDERSTAND THE
GOALS MAKING NO MORE I
UNDERSTAND TRYING TO CARRY THIS
THROUGH BUT I JUST SOME
OF THESE ARE NOT GREAT.
>> YEAH, SOME OF THE
CONNECTIONS UNDER THE
AFFORDABLE SUSTAINABLE DENHA
PARTICULARLY I WOULD SAY IN
THIS ONE SUCH JUST MAYBE LIKE
RELOOKING AT THOSE AND MAKING
SURE THAT'S REALLY HOW WE WANT
JUST ONE OF THE ICONS I HAD
THAT TO THE VALUES THE GOALS
ARE WELL I MEAN I LIKE TRYING
TO CONNECT IT TO AFFORDABILITY
AND EQUITY SUSTAINABILITY
WHATEVER DYNAMISM I JUST DON'T
WANT TO ALWAYS LIKE THE
EQUITABLE ONE HERE DOESN'T
REALLY SEEM LIKE IT'S CONNECTED
TO GOALS.
>> I WROTE A BOOK THE
SUSTAINABILITY THING THE
CIRCULAR ECONOMY.
>> I JUST I DON'T DELIVER
BALANCED ENOUGH MAYBE OR MAYBE
I WOULD JUST SAY THEM THEY'RE
NOT GOING TO DO MUCH.
>> YEAH, I THINK I HAD A
COMMENT WHERE I WASN'T SURE
THAT THE VALUES AND THE GOALS
REALLY TIED TOGETHER AND MAYBE
DOING LIKE TAKE THE LITTLE
ICONS IF WE'RE SET ON THE ICONS
WHICH I DON'T LIKE SOME OF THE
ICONS I HAVE THAT NOTE IN HERE
IS LIKE MAYBE PUT A LITTLE ICON
NEXT TO WHERE IT SAYS IN THE
TEXT THAT THAT COULD BE TIED TO
OUR AFFORDABLE VALUE.
>> SO ONE THING IS WHEN WE GET
TO THE IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX
ALL THOSE STEPS WILL HAVE A
COLUMN THAT SAYS WHICH OF THESE
THEY MEANS AFFORDABLE,
EQUITABLE, SUSTAINABLE,
DYNAMIC.
SO IT MIGHT NOT SO IT COULD BE
IN THE TEXT BUT IT WILL ALSO BE
IN THAT THAT'S GOING TO BE MORE
LIKE A WELL IT'S STARTING AS AN
EXCEL SHEET.
IT'LL BE A TABLE WHERE WE CAN
PUT WHICH VALUES IT MEANS OK,
UM WELL THERE IS A REMOVE
ENTIRE SECTION THING HERE SO
YES IT'S THAT IT SAYS PAGE
SIXTY THREE THROUGH SEVENTY ONE
BECAUSE THAT'S THE WHOLE THING
.
YEAH WE HAD THIS DISCUSSION AT
THE TABLE AND WE BASICALLY GAVE
FEEDBACK TO THE CONSULTANTS
THAT WE DID NOT AGREE WITH THIS
ENTIRE SECTION AND YET IT IS
HERE IS THAT JUST FOR MY
CLARIFICATION IS THAT GO GO
FIVE OR BECAUSE THAT THAT GOES
THROUGH PAGE SEVENTY ONE GOAL
SIX AND SEVEN ARE ALSO IN THE
SECTION BUT YOU WOULD NOT
STRIKE THOSE NO I MEAN I
SPECIFICALLY WANT TO STRIKE THE
FIRST GO GO FIVE BUT WE CAN
TALK THROUGH THE THE OTHER TWO
WHETHER WE WANT TO KEEP THOSE
BECAUSE I THINK THERE ARE SOME
THINGS THAT ARE GOING TO BE
DIFFICULT FOR US TO SUPPORT
EVEN IN THE LONG VIEW IN A
TWENTY FIVE YEAR REVIEW.
SO THAT WAS THAT WAS JUST SO
MARGINAL FOR FURCAL FIVE AND
THE CORRESPONDING IS THAT WE
HEARD I HEARD LOUD AND CLEAR
FROM THIS BODY THAT YOU DO NOT
WANT TO USE LAND USE AS A
LIMITING FACTOR TO GROW
BUSINESS.
YOU DON'T SEE THAT AS AN
EFFECTIVE STRATEGY TO USE OUR
LAND USE POLICY TO TRY AND GET
YOUR ACT TO PRESERVE JOBS IN
THIS COMMUNITY.
>> UM, AND THAT'S SO OUR LAND
USE DISTRICTS ARE GOING TO
REFLECT THAT.
THE QUESTION I WOULD POSE BACK
IS THAT THAT CAN STILL WE CAN
STILL RECOGNIZE THAT IT'S A
GOAL OF US TO SUPPORT TAX BASE
GENERATION FROM NONRESIDENTIAL
THAT WE WANT TO SUPPORT
ENTREPRENEURIAL BUSINESSES.
UM, WITHOUT US DOING SO THROUGH
LAND USE RESTRICTION SO WE CAN
ABSOLUTELY REMOVE THOSE
SECTIONS IN THAT GOAL.
BUT I JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY
THAT THE REASON YOU'RE SEEING
IT IS NOT BECAUSE WE DIDN'T
HEAR THAT MESSAGE.
WE HEARD IT LOUD AND CLEAR.
THAT IS AN WE HAVE MADE THOSE
CHANGES TO OUR LAND USE
CATEGORIES.
>> I STILL THINK THAT LAND USE
PLANS SHOULD BE HOLISTIC THINGS
THAT MAKE WHAT IS ARE NOT JUST
HOUSING BUT IF THIS BOARD
DOESN'T AGREE WITH IT AGAIN,
WE'VE BEEN REALLY LEANING INTO
HOUSING IF YOU WANT THIS TO BE
MORE OF A HOUSING FOCUS PLAN
THEN MAYBE THAT'S PART OF THE
POLICY DISCUSSION WE WANT TO
PRESENT TO CITY COUNCIL IS
DON'T SPEND YOUR RESOURCES ON
THIS OTHER THESE OTHER ITEMS.
UM, I'LL WEIGH IN HERE.
>> I GUESS FOR ME ACTUALLY
ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION IS
IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RANGE FOR
TWENTY FIFTY RESILIENCE IS
IMPORTANT IF WE ARE GROWING
SEVENTY FIVE OR FORTY FIVE
THOUSAND HOUSEHOLDS I THINK
THAT'S KIND OF THE RANGE FROM
THE 12 TO 18 HUNDRED TARGET
THAT WE HAD ANNUALLY FOR TWENTY
FIVE YEARS THEN HAVING A
DISCUSSION ABOUT SOCIOECONOMIC
WAGE MOBILITY AS WELL AS THE
FOR FOR FOLKS TO BE ABLE TO YOU
KNOW, CREATE AND HAVE DIVERSE
TYPES OF JOBS TO CAPTURE
INNOVATION AND TO CONTINUE TO
ENCOURAGE EXPORT ECONOMIES IS
GOING TO BE AN IMPORTANT ITEM
FOR THE CONTINUED VIBRANCY
ATTRACTIVENESS OF ANN ARBOR.
RIGHT.
SO THERE'S THERE'S TALENT
ATTRACTION, TALENT RETENTION.
SO NO, I DON'T THINK WE SHOULD
FOREGO THIS CONCEPT OF ECONOMIC
ECONOMY OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE
RESILIENCE.
WE TALK ABOUT THE KIND OF THE
DOMINANCE, THE DOMINANCE OF THE
UNIVERSITIES EMPLOYMENT BEING
YOU KNOW, I THINK THE FOURTH
MOST ECONOMICALLY DEPENDENT IN
THE COUNTRY ON AN ANCHOR
INSTITUTION.
>> I DO THINK IT IS IMPORTANT
FOR US OVER THE NEXT TWENTY
FIVE THIRTY YEARS TO ENCOURAGE
GREATER ECONOMIC
DIVERSIFICATION, INNOVATION.
>> SO I DO THINK THAT THIS HAS
A PLACE IN THE PLAN.
>> DO I THINK AFFORDABILITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY ARE ABSOLUTELY
ONE THOUSAND PERCENT BUT IT
NEEDS TO BE WELL BALANCED SO I
WILL AGREE WITH YOUR SENTIMENT
MR THAT THIS IS AN IMPORTANT
SECTION TO HAVE MEAN THE NOTES
HOWEVER ARE FROM ALL OF US ARE
LARGELY QUESTIONING OR ASKING
TO REMOVE.
SO I APPRECIATE WHAT YOU'RE
SAYING THE COMMENTS NOT JUST
MINE AND ONLY TWO IN HERE THE
TABLE SEEMS TO HAVE A LOT
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS AND WHY
IT'S HERE.
SO CERTAINLY SPREADING OVER
WHAT 60 SIXTY THREE TO SEVENTY
FIVE.
SO OVER THOSE TWELVE PAGES IT'S
LIKE IF THERE'S A WAY TO
ACCOMPLISH WHAT YOU ARE HOPING
TO ACCOMPLISH MR WINDSOR.
BUT MAYBE AN A SPREAD OR TWO AS
OPPOSED TO THE SIX SPREADS THAT
WE ARE LOOKING AT BECAUSE I
MEAN I'M JUST LOOKING AT THE
COMMENTS THE LIKE RETROFITTING
REMOVE THIS GOAL REMOVE THIS
GOAL, REMOVE THIS SECTION.
WHERE DID THESE NUMBERS COME
FROM?
>> THIS IS NOT GOOD.
SO I'M NOT IT'S NOT LIKE FROM
LAST MEETING
.
NO, NO.
I'M LOOKING AT PAGES NINE TEN
TEN.
YEAH.
>> AND ELEVEN OK.
THE LAST TIME WE DID ALSO HAVE
A DISCUSSION ABOUT REMOVING
SOME OF THE POINTS ABOUT
TAXPAYER.
RIGHT.
UM OK.
AND I YOU KNOW THAT'S ABOUT
THIS PROCESS BUT I JUST WANTED
TO BE YOU KNOW I I JUST WANT TO
BE CLEAR AND I THINK I WAS
HAVING A LITTLE BIT OF A
REACTION.
I MEAN I HEARD LOUD AND CLEAR
THE FEEDBACK ON THE LAND USE
POLICY AND WE WE'VE RESPONDED
TO THAT THE INCLUSION
MAINTAINING THIS AS A GOAL CAN
CAN COEXIST WITH THOSE LAND USE
DIRECTIONS.
I ABSOLUTELY THINK SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS HERE TOO LIKE JUST
JUST FOR CONTEXT LIKE WHY CAN'T
YOU HAVE USED THE LAND FOR
STARTUPS?
THEY WILL THAT'S PART OF THEIR
PLANS TO DO A LOT OF THAT.
BUT THERE MIGHT BE
CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE NOT UNLIKE
OUR COMMUNITY CONVERSATION
ABOUT THE BENEFITS OF OFF
CAMPUS HOUSING VERSUS ON CAMPUS
HOUSING THAT THAT HAS SOME
FINANCIAL BENEFITS TO THE CITY
.
THERE MIGHT BE SPECIFIC TAX
INCENTIVES FOR EXAMPLE, IN A
BURGEONING INDUSTRY THAT MIGHT
BE WELL SUITED TO PRIVATE
SECTOR LOCATION RATHER THAN
PUBLIC SECTOR LOCATION.
THE INVESTING IN TECHNOLOGY,
THEY'VE REALLY CHANGED THEIR
INVESTMENT STRATEGY IS TO HAVE
A TECH TRANSFER WHERE THEY
WOULD DO A LICENSE, A LOT
OF LICENSING OF TECHNOLOGY THAT
COMES THE UNIVERSITY NOW
THEY'RE REALLY FUNCTIONING WELL
LIKE A VENTURE CAPITAL.
THEY'RE REALLY SUPPORTING FUNDS
AND TRYING TO GROW THEM BOTH ON
CAMPUS AND THROUGHOUT THE
COMMUNITY, YOU KNOW, THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY.
>> SO THOSE ARE SOME QUESTIONS
.
ABSOLUTELY.
I GUESS MAYBE IF IT WAS THE
CONVERSATION THERE'S A LOT
OF SUPPORT FOR GETTING RID
OF THAT WHOLE GREAT I YOU KNOW
HOW YOU ORDER PLAN BUT MAYBE
THE FOCUS COULD BE ON JUST THAT
IF YOU DON'T THINK YOU DO THINK
THAT THERE'S SPACE FOR THAT
KIND OF GOAL, IT SHOULD BE
TRUNCATED IN A MUCH MORE
APPROPRIATE WAY GIVEN THE
PRIORITY WEIGHT YOU'RE GIVEN TO
OTHER ASPECTS OF THE PLAN.
>> I MEAN THAT WOULD BE MY
RECOMMENDATION BECAUSE LIKE
WHEN YOU GET INTO THE GOALS IT
SHIFTS INTO LAND.
SO THE FIVE POINT ONE IT'S
TRYING TO CAPTURE WHERE THOSE
STARTUPS GO BY POINT TO LAND IS
NEEDED FOR A DIVERSE AND
EQUITABLE RANGES OF BUSINESSES.
THEN IT SHIFTS IN SIX ONE TO
THE DOWNTOWN SO AND THEN BACK
TO PLYMOUTH ROAD.
SO IT'S LARGELY TALKING ABOUT
LAND AGAIN.
SO I I BELIEVE THAT YOU HEARD
US.
THAT'S NOT WHAT I AM
COMMUNICATING HERE AT ALL.
THAT'S NOT IT AT ALL.
IT'S MORE THIS WAS A
RECOMMENDATION FROM THE
CONSULTANTS THAT I DIDN'T THINK
LANDED VERY WELL AT THE TABLE
AND IT'S TWELVE PAGES IN THE
PLAN AND IF YOU FEEL LIKE IF
OTHERS FEEL LIKE IT SHOULD STAY
I WOULD SUGGEST THAT WE
TRUNCATE IT SIGNIFICANTLY SO I
WOULD SAY WE GO FROM TWELVE TO
TWO LIKE A SPREAD AND IF YOU
CAN'T YOU KNOW WHATEVER
SUGGESTIONS YOU HAVE I THINK WE
WOULD SEE AFTER THE FIRST
REVISION AND THAT SEEMS TO
SUMMARIZE WHAT'S IN THE
COMMENTS AGAIN, I DO THINK IT
WOULD BE ODD TO GO TO IT TOO.
>> I MEAN I I I DO AGREE WITH
YOU OVERALL BUT LIKE HOUSING
LIKE A MILLION PAGES AND THEN
WE'RE GOING TO LIKE THIS WHOLE
OTHER LIKE SUBCHAPTER THAT'S
LIKE TWO PAGES.
>> I MEAN I DON'T HAVE GOALS.
I THINK I HAVE A PROBLEM WITH
THE STRATEGIES AND I THINK MY
PROBLEM IS LIKE MY CHIP ON MY
SHOULDER LIKE I LIVE IN
NORTHEASTERNER AND I DON'T WANT
U OF M TAKING OVER ALTHOUGH I
DON'T WANT TO BE IN A PARKING
SPACE PARKING GARAGE FOR A
MONORAIL THERE AND I FEEL LIKE
ANY SORT OF INNOVATION SPOKE TO
ME AND I'M NOT READY FOR THAT
BECAUSE I'M DOING MY HOMEWORK
IN ORDER.
BUT THIS TO ME LIKE DIDN'T TAKE
THAT INTO ACCOUNT BECAUSE I
STILL WAS READING THINGS.
IT FELT LIKE IT WAS JUST BUYING
LIKE AN INNOVATION DISTRICT IN
THESE STARTUPS HAVE TO LOCATE
NEAR CAMPUS LIKE I WAS LIKE
THIRTY TEN TWENTY EIGHT LOCATED
IN ANN ARBOR THAT'S ABOUT
THIRTY PERCENT.
ISN'T THAT GOOD.
SO I ADVOCATED FOR IT TO BE
STREAMLINED AND ALSO LIKE IT
JUST FELT LIKE THEY WERE STILL
TRYING TO CREATE THIS
INNOVATION DISTRICT EVEN IF
THEY HAD THE ZONING IT'S VERY
CLEAR TO ME IN THE RATIONALE.
>> SO YOU NOT SO LADIES YOU
KNOW I GUESS THE DISTINCTION
THAT I WANT TO BE CLEAR ON IS I
HEARD LOUD AND CLEAR THAT WE
WERE ADVOCATING LIMITS ON
HOUSING THEIR EMPLOYMENT.
SO IT'S NOT DO SO IS TO PROVIDE
MORE SPACE FOR INNOVATION ZONES
THERE I HEARD LOUD AND CLEAR
OF THE LANGUAGE AND DO NOT DO
THAT.
YEAH, THERE MIGHT STILL BE LAND
USE POLICY AND REGULATION
REGULATIONS THAT WE MAKE
REGARDLESS OF THAT THAT MAKE
THEM MORE OR LESS COMPATIBLE
WITH OFFICE DEVELOPMENT OR
RESEARCH LAB DEVELOPMENT.
WE MIGHT FOR EXAMPLE HAVE
DIFFERENT PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
WE MIGHT HAVE FLEXIBILITY A
NUMBER OF STORIES BECAUSE SOME
LABORATORIES MIGHT NEED MORE
VENTILATION THAT IS MORE
DIFFICULT TO ACHIEVE IN A
MULTISTORY BUILDING.
SO UM IS IS YOUR REACTION TO
THAT THAT THAT I WAS MISREADING
THAT THAT NOT ONLY DO NOT WANT
HOUSING LIMITED THERE BUT YOU
DON'T WANT ANY CATERING TO
THESE TYPES OF BUSINESSES
OF THE STINK FROM WASHTENAW OR
DOWNTOWN OR BRIARWOOD.
>> I THINK THAT'S SORT OF HOW I
FEEL.
YEAH I WOULD PLUS ONE THAT CAN
I CAN I ASK A QUESTION ON SHOW
MY IGNORANCE TO COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES ARE TAXED AT THE
SAME RATE AS RESIDENTIAL TRADE.
IT'S JUST A TAX ON ASSESSED
VALUE OR IS THERE A
DIFFERENTIAL TAX RATE FEE UP?
>> I CAN ANSWER THAT.
THE DIFFERENCE IS BETWEEN
PRINCIPLE NON PRINCIPLE USE THE
MILITARY IT IS GOING TO BE
SIMILAR OR IS GOING TO BE THE
SAME FOR NON PRINCIPLE AND
COMMERCIAL BUT IF YOU OWN YOUR
OWN HOME AND YOU LIVE IN IT
RESIDE IN IT FOR I THINK MORE
THAN HALF A YEAR OR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT, THEN YOU GET A
PRINCIPAL EXEMPTION WHICH IS A
LOWER YOU DON'T PAY THE SCHOOL
TAXES THE STATE SCHOOL TO
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY, PRIVATE
PROPERTIES THAT ARE DEVELOPED
FOR COMMERCIAL USES TO GENERATE
A HIGHER YIELD TO THE CITY AS
THAN PRINCIPAL RESIDENCES.
I SAY THE SAME AS THERE'S THE
SAME AS THE APARTMENT BUILDING
AS AN APARTMENT.
SO IF YOU DON'T LIVE IN IT OR
IF IT'S MULTIFAMILY IT'LL
ATTACKS AT THE SAME TIME THE
SAME RATE.
>> YEAH BUT THE BIGGER AT A
HIGHER RATE FOR SCHOOLS.
>> YEAH.
AND THE BIGGER THING THAT'S
TALKED ABOUT WITHIN TAX WORLD
BECAUSE I'M A TAX NERD IS HOW
MANY SERVICES THEY USE COMPARED
TO THEIR DEMAND FOR PUBLIC
SERVICES VERSUS HOW MUCH TAXES
THEY PAY.
THAT'S LIKE THE GENERAL THING
BECAUSE YOU AGREE WITH THE
STATEMENT I'M ON PAGE 60 FIVE
DIVERSIFYING THE TAX BASE WILL
HELP LONG TERM FISCAL ALSO THE
CITY CAN CONTINUE TO GROW TO
PROVIDE SERVICES, INVESTMENTS
AND PROGRAMS AS IT GROWS.
IS THAT A TRUE STATEMENT I'M
ASKING THE SIZE THE SORTS
OF AUTHORITY THAT IS A DETROIT
FREE PRESS NEWSPAPER ARTICLE
WHICH STRIKES ME AS NOT A VERY
COMPELLING SOURCE TO MAKE AN
ASSERTION LIKE THAT.
UM, YEAH.
WHICH POINT?
IT'S THE SECOND BULLET POINT IN
THE LONG CONSIDERATIONS I WOULD
SAY DIVERSE THIS IS THIS IS
MEAN AS A HALF TAX LIKE IN MY
DAY JOB THE DIVERSIFICATION IS
OFTEN A BETTER STRATEGY FOR
WHAT?
FOR RESILIENCE REASONS NOT
NECESSARILY LIKE THE YEAH FOR
RESILIENCE REASONS IF ONE
SECTOR CRASHES YOU HAVE YOU'RE
NOT PUTTING ALL OF YOUR CHIPS
IN THAT SECTORS WHICH IS THE
SAME AS THINKING ABOUT YOU
KNOW, BEING A ONE COMPANY TOWN.
RIGHT.
LIKE THAT'S IT'S NOT DIFFERENT
.
SO TO ME I GUESS PIGGYBACK OFF
THAT THIS IS GOING TO TAKE A
LOOK AT THE DIFFERENT CLASSES
WHETHER IT'S LIKE APARTMENTS,
OFFICES OR INDUSTRIAL
WAREHOUSING AND MAKE
ASSESSMENTS BASED ON THAT
ENTIRE CLASS AND WHAT HAPPENED
IN THE OVERALL PROPERTY VALUES.
SO THAT'S GOING TO BE JERRY AND
THE ASSESSOR FOR THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
>> THEY'LL MAKE ADJUSTMENTS AT
THE END OF THE YEAR.
SO TO THAT EXTENT I GUESS IT'S
IT'S KIND OF TRUE YOU DON'T
WANT JUST ALL APARTMENTS, RIGHT
OR YOU DON'T WANT ALL OFFICE
BUILDINGS EITHER KIND OF THING.
>> SO TO THE EXTENT THAT YOU
HAVE A MORE BALANCED APPROACH
IN THAT RESPECT MAKES YOUR TAX
BASE A LITTLE BIT, THERE'S A
TENSION HERE SO IT DOES COME
BACK TO LAND USE ULTIMATELY
WE'RE GOING TO DIVERSIFY THE
TAX BASE THAT MEANS WE'RE
TAKING SOME THINGS OUT
OF HOUSING.
WE'RE ALLOWING SOME PROPERTIES
TO BE AVAILABLE IN COMMERCIAL
USES RATHER THAN HOUSES.
>> AND THIS IS THE I THINK THE
CORE KIND OF QUESTION FOR ME IS
THERE'S A HOUSING TO JOBS
IMBALANCE NOW THAT EXISTS WE
ARE HOW JOBS VERSUS HOW MANY
HOUSES WE HAVE.
>> WE HAVE TOO MANY JOBS BUT
THERE ARE MANY EXAMPLES
OF CITIES THAT HAVE THE
OPPOSITE ISSUE RIGHT.
AND SO THAT IS KIND OF LIKE AS
WE LOOK THROUGH TO TWENTY FIFTY
AND IF WE HAVE AN INCREASE
OF SAY THIRTY TO SEVENTY FIVE
THOUSAND PEOPLE, DO WE HAVE THE
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES WHEN WE
HAVE NINETY FOUR THOUSAND
PERMANENT JOBS AND SO LIKE I AM
I AM FOUR AFFORDABILITY BUT WE
ALSO NEED TO CONTINUE TO
PROGRESS.
I THINK NEEDS TO BE A BALANCED
APPROACH AND THAT'S WHY I'M
TAKING THIS STANCE.
I'M NOT LOOKING TO TAKE MY EYE
OFF THE THE GOAL OF IMPROVING
STOCK ACCESSIBILITY BUT THAT
ALSO MEANS ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY
,ACCESSIBILITY OF SOCIAL AND
SOCIOECONOMIC MOBILITY AND WAGE
MOBILITY AS WELL.
AND SO THAT IS YOU KNOW, ANN
ARBOR IS ATTRACTIVE BECAUSE
THERE ARE GREAT JOBS HERE.
>> THERE'S GREAT TALENT.
RIGHT.
AND SO I THINK THE PART OF THE
PLAN HAS TO ALSO BE
COMPENSATING FOR THAT AS WELL.
>> SO THAT THAT IS CERTAINLY
CAN WE COMPRESS
THIS TO BE A
LOT MORE FOCUSED?
YES, I THINK SO.
I THINK WE HAVE TO HAVE
CONSIDERATIONS.
>> BUT I MEAN IF WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT TWENTY FIVE YEAR PLAN TO
NOT THINK ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS TO
OVERALL JOB CREATION, WE'RE
JUST WE'RE LUCKY WE DON'T
NECESSARILY HAVE TO THINK ABOUT
THAT I SUPPOSE.
>> BUT I ASSUMING THAT THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS NOT
GOING TO CRASH THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN, I'M NOT SURE AT
THIS POINT THAT'S A GOOD
ASSUMPTION.
I'M GOING TO JUST SAY THAT I
MEAN YEAH, WE'RE ALL JUST
ASSUMING OF THEM IS HERE AND
IT'S GOING TO BE HERE FOREVER
AND I WOULD LIKE TO THINK THAT
BUT OH MY GOSH.
ALTHOUGH I SUPPOSE IF YOU HAVE
BEEN CRASHES AND WE'VE ALL GOT
BIGGER PROBLEMS, I THINK WE'RE
NOT GOING TO SIT THERE AND
THINK ABOUT AND I THINK THAT'S
THE CHALLENGE IS WE'RE STILL
LAND CONSTRAINED.
WE'RE SO STRONG EVEN IF THE
UNIVERSITY SLOWS ITS GROWTH,
THE LAST YEAR THEY HAD A RECORD
ONE HUNDRED AND TWO THOUSAND
APPLICATIONS FOR THIS FALL'S
ENROLLMENT.
I KEEP MY THOUGHT GOING.
SURE.
THE STRATEGY THAT WE KIND
OF ARE TAKING I THINK WE NEED
TO SET ASIDE SOME DISTRICTS TO
ALLOW BUSINESSES TO DIVERSIFY
THE TAX BASE AND WE'LL LET SOME
HOUSING HAPPEN WITHIN THEM.
BUT GOING TO THIS IS GOING TO
MR. LEE'S COMMENTS.
BUT WE'RE GOING TO REDUCE THE
NUISANCE STANDARDS TO MAKE THEM
COMPATIBLE.
BUT IF YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT
DIVERSIFYING THE WORKFORCE, I
MEAN THERE ARE A LOT OF OFFICE
BUILDINGS IN DOWNTOWNS THAT ARE
SITTING EMPTY RIGHT.
OR YOU UKRAINE RATHER THAN
SAYING WE'RE GOING TO SET A
DISTRICT FOR BUSINESS AND ALLOW
RESIDENTIAL AND MAYBE WE'LL
HAVE DISTRICTS THAT ARE
RESIDENTIAL THAT WILL ALLOW
BUSINESSES TO COME INTO AND
KIND OF FLIP THE PARADIGM.
>> IS THAT CONCEIVABLE OR IS
THAT NOT POSSIBLE?
THAT'S LIMITED I THINK AT THE
SCALE I THINK THE ISSUE FOR ME
IS THE SCALE 94000 JOBS LIKE
THAT.
THE CONSULTANTS GAVE US A
NUMBER EIGHTY THOUSAND WE DON'T
HAVE ENOUGH RESIDENTS IN THE
CITY TO FILL THE JOBS THAT ARE
IN THE CITY CURRENTLY RIGHT
NOW.
AND SO THAT'S WHY EIGHTY
THOUSAND PEOPLE ARE COMMUTING
IN FOR WORK.
>> THAT PLUS OTHER REASONS
OF COURSE.
SO THE SCALE IS SORT OF OFF
LIKE WHAT'S THE COMMISSIONER
WHETHER BE YOU BROUGHT UP THE
GERMAN RESEARCH FOLKS SARTORIUS
WHO HOW MUCH LAND THEY TAKE AND
VARIETY JOBS, HOW MANY JOBS PER
ACRE DID THEY CREATE AND SO
THAT'S JUST WAS THAT YEAH THEY
HAVE A BIG FOOTPRINT AND THEY
EMPLOY 200 PEOPLE.
>> RIGHT.
THIS IS AN ENORMOUS RESOURCE.
HARD DRIVE.
YEAH YEAH.
THE OTHER SIDE OF OF NINETY
FOUR ACTUALLY LIKE S VERY S AND
SO WE SAID LET'S SAY WE SET
ASIDE THAT LAND WE'RE NOT GOING
TO GET THE SAME JOB PRODUCTION
THAT OUR LARGEST EMPLOYER BOTH
THE UNIVERSITY IN THE HOSPITAL
SO IT'S THE HOSPITAL AND THE
UNIVERSITY PRODUCE AND THE RATE
OF GROWTH BECAUSE THEY ACQUIRED
ANOTHER HOSPITAL SYSTEM IN THE
STATE IS JUST IT'S STAGGERING
AND I THINK THAT WAS WHAT WAS
HELPFUL TO ME WAS JUST SORT
OF LOOKING AT THOSE NUMBERS.
A NOTE IN HERE THE TOP
EMPLOYERS IN ANN ARBOR JUST TO
PIGGYBACK ON THAT THEY DID THIS
CHART MISSES THE UNIVERSITY
HEALTH SYSTEM.
>> RIGHT.
SO THAT'S TWENTY TWO THOUSAND
PEOPLE IN ADDITION TO THE
THIRTY ONE POINT THREE THOUSAND
PEOPLE FROM THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN CENTRAL CAMPUS
RIGHT THOUGH AND I DID ADD A
LINK TO THAT BUT THESE TRINITY
HEALTH SYSTEM IS SAINT JOE,
FORMER ST. JOE'S THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN HEALTH SYSTEM IS AN
ADDITIONAL TWENTY TWO THOUSAND
PEOPLE.
>> IT'S AN ASSESSMENT.
YEAH.
SO THIS IS WHY WE HAD OR AT
LEAST MY MEMORY SERVES RIGHT.
WE SORT OF REJECTED THIS IN THE
FIRST PLACE BECAUSE OF THE
IMBALANCE OF THE PERMANENT JOBS
AND THE LACK OF RESIDENTS IN
THE CITY TO FILL THE CURRENT
PERMANENT JOBS AND THAT THAT
WAS LIKE FULL TIME JOBS AND
THEN THERE WAS A WHOLE ANOTHER
CATEGORY OF PART TIME JOBS THAT
SAT ON TOP OF THAT.
SO AGAIN, I THINK I UNDERSTAND
WHAT YOU ARE COMMUNICATING TO
MR. LEONARD AND SHIRLEY.
>> I CERTAINLY RESPECT YOUR
EXPERTIZE HERE.
I JUST THINK THIS IT'S JUST TOO
MUCH IN THE IN THE PLAN AS IT
IS.
SO MY FEEDBACK IF WE DON'T
STRIKE THE WHOLE THING IS THAT
WE CONDENSE IT TOWARDS WHAT YOU
WOULD LIKE US TO SEE AND THEN
ONCE WE GET THOSE REVISIONS I
THINK WE CAN GIVE ADDITIONAL
FEEDBACK BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE
THAT THAT IT'S AT LEAST FAIR TO
SOME OF THE GOALS THAT YOU WANT
US TO CONTINUE TO CONSIDER.
DO WE WANT TO TAKE A VOTE ON
THAT TO CONDENSE OF THIS?
>> I'M OK WITH THE CONCEPT
OF CONDENSING I'M GENERALLY
ACTUALLY OK WITH THE IDEA
OF LIKE REDUCTION OF MELTING
AND AND COMBINING TO TRY TO
CREATE SIMPLICITY THROUGHOUT
THE ENTIRE PLANT.
SO I'M OK WITH THE CONCEPT
OF CONTRACTING OR COMPRESSING
THIS BUT I JUST DON'T THINK
THAT IS AN IMPORTANT CONCEPT
THAT NEEDS TO REMAIN IN THE
PLAN.
>> YEAH, I AGREE.
I THINK JUST LIKE WE CAN'T HAVE
STAGNANT HOUSING HAVING
STAGNANT EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES IS ALSO NOT
GREAT.
>> SO I'M I DON'T WANT TO SAY
LIKE OH LET'S JUST IGNORE
EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS AND
BECAUSE PART OF WHERE I LIVE IN
LARGE PART IS BECAUSE I LIKE
THE BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES THAT
I COULD WALK TO AND THE THINGS
THAT AND WHICH IS IS A MUCH
SMALLER SECTOR THAN SAY A
LARGER LAND USE OPTIONS.
BUT ONE OF THE REASONS THAT I
DIDN'T LIKE THE LAND USE
OPTIONS IS BECAUSE I'VE LIVED
IN ANN ARBOR FOR A LONG TIME
AND WE HAVE SET ASIDE SPACES IN
THE PAST AND THEN THOSE SPACES
DIDN'T END UP BEING THE ONES
USED FOR WHATEVER THE THE
BUSINESS WAS YOU KNOW, IT WAS
ALL GOING TO BE I GREW UP ON
THE NORTH SIDE AND IT WAS ALL
GOING TO HAPPEN THERE BUT THEN
IT ENDED UP HAPPENING ON THE
SOUTH SIDE AND AND THEN FIZER
LEFT AND THEN THERE WAS JUST
LIKE SO FOR ME SETTING ASIDE
SPECIAL AREAS DON'T IT DOESN'T
NECESSARILY LEAD TO WHAT WE
WANT BUT I'M NOT BUT I DON'T
THINK I'M WELL I'M NOT AGREEING
WITH WE SHOULD JUST STRIKE THIS
AND NOT TALK ABOUT EMPLOYMENT
BECAUSE I THINK THAT'S
SHORTSIGHTED.
I THINK A CITY DEPENDS ON THE
EMPLOYMENT AND WE KNOW WHO OUR
MAJOR EMPLOYER IS AND IS MOST
LIKELY GOING TO BE IN THE
FUTURE.
>> BUT I THINK WE STILL NEED TO
HAVE SOMETHING THAT ADDRESSES
EMPLOYMENT SO I CAN SEE
SHRINKING IT OR SOMETHING.
>> BUT I THINK IT'S SHORT
SIGHTED TO JUST SAY WE'RE ONLY
GOING TO TALK ABOUT HOUSING
MAYBE MAY I MAKE A SUGGESTION
THAT ACTUALLY I THINK SQUARES A
COUPLE OF THINGS I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT LIKE HAVING A DIVERSE
MIX OF LAND SOURCES AND RIGHT
NOW WE'RE TIPPED WAY TOWARDS
ONE END AND ACKNOWLEDGING THAT
LIKE WE ARE REALLY TRYING A LOT
THROUGH THAT FIRST SET
OF STRATEGIES TO INCREASE
HOUSING WE WILL TIP US.
BUT I'M ACTUALLY ONE OF THE
CONCERNS THAT I HAD IS THAT
I'VE SEEN SOME REDUNDANCY
BETWEEN GOAL NUMBER FOUR ABOUT
LIKE WHICH IS RETAIL IN
NEIGHBORHOODS AND THEN GOAL
NUMBER SIX WHICH IS IT'S THE
SAME THING ALL OVER AGAIN.
SO I WONDER IF LIKE THE FIRST
SET OF STRATEGIES OR THE FIRST
PART I DON'T KNOW WE'RE CALLING
THESE SUBCHAPTER S BUT THE
NEIGHBORHOODS ONE IS REALLY
FOCUS ON HOUSING IF THEN
THERE'S ANOTHER ONE THAT'S LIKE
THE LIKE IF THE NEXT THING IS
ABOUT DIVERSE MIX OF OF LAND
USES THAT ALLOWS US TO SAY
LOOK, TALK ABOUT BALANCE.
WE WANT TO BE A COMPLETE CITY
THAT HAS ALL OF THE THINGS
WE'RE OUT OF BALANCE AND TWENTY
FIVE YEARS FROM NOW OUR BALANCE
MIGHT BE A LITTLE I MEAN
HOPEFULLY IT'S MORE BALANCED
BUT WE BOTH WANTED TO SWING THE
OTHER WAY EITHER THAT'S NOT
GOOD.
AND SO AND THAT WILL ALSO
ALLOWS YOU THEN MAYBE TO REDUCE
SOME OF THE REDUNDANCY BETWEEN
WHAT'S GOOD FOR AND WHAT'S IN
SIX BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW IF
THAT IF THAT HELPS A LITTLE BIT
MORE AND I THINK THAT IT'S A
COMMISSIONER WEATHERSBEE POINT
ABOUT NOT REALLY LIKING TO SEE
JUST AN EXCLUSIVE INNOVATION
ZONE.
I THINK ACTUALLY THE ENTIRE
COMMISSION AGREED LIKE I DON'T
KNOW THAT THAT NECESSARILY IS
THE RIGHT THING AND SO IT
DOESN'T NECESSARILY HAVE TO
EXCLUDE AND IT ONLY CAN BE
INNOVATION.
>> IT CAN STILL BE INCLUSIVE
OF HOUSING.
>> HERE'S ANOTHER WRINKLE I'LL
THROW IN IF IF YOU ARE LOOKING
FOR OFFICE RIGHT NOW, CHANCES
ARE YOU CAN FIND THE OFFICE THE
HERE'S A SLIGHT WRINKLE AND
COMPLEXITY ASSOCIATED WITH THAT
IS IF YOU ARE LOOKING FOR LARGE
FLOOR PLATES, IF YOU'RE KIND
OF LIKE A LARGER COMPANY THAT'S
LIKE LOOKING FOR TWENTY FIVE OR
FORTY FIVE THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
THERE ACTUALLY ISN'T THAT MUCH
RIGHT BUT IF YOU WANT SIX TO
TEN THOUSAND SO IT'S KIND
OF LIKE THE SUBSETS LIKE WHAT
LEVEL OF SIZE AND WHAT IS
AVAILABLE TO COMPANIES MOST
OF THEM ARE TRYING TO GO TO
CLASS RIGHT.
THEY WANT KIND OF A HIGHER END
KIND OF THEY'RE WILLING TO TAKE
LESS SPACE AND SO WHEN YOU HAVE
A COMPANY THAT'S LOOKING FOR
FORTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
THERE'S NOT THAT MANY OPTIONS
OUT THERE.
>> AND SO WHAT IMPLICATIONS
THAT HAS FOR LAND USE?
AGAIN, I DON'T KNOW THAT I TEND
TO AGREE WITH YOU,
COMMISSIONER, WHETHER IT BE ON
THE CONCEPT OF WE DON'T NEED
THIS EXCLUSIVE ZONE SPECIFIC
FOR ONLY OFFICE OR INNOVATION.
>> I ALSO THIS RELIEF SAID
ABOUT THE CONCEPT OF LIKE
LOOSENING NUISANCE REGULATIONS.
I DON'T KNOW ABOUT THAT.
I DON'T LIKE NUISANCE SHOULD BE
NUISANCE AS NUISANCE LIKE WE
DON'T WANT VIBRATIONS ODORS
EMANATING PASS YOU KNOW LIKE SO
BUT TO THAT EFFECT I DON'T
I'M
PROBABLY SENDING A LITTLE BIT
OF MIXED MESSAGES HERE BUT
THERE'S COMPLEXITIES ASSOCIATED
WITH THE TYPE OF COMPANIES THAT
WANT TO LOCATE IN ANN ARBOR
WHAT IS AVAILABLE TO THEM FROM
A PRODUCT STANDPOINT?
I THINK THE RECOGNITION OF THE
DIVERSIFICATION AND THE
BALANCING OF THIS PLANT IS
IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN OVER
THE NEXT TWENTY FIVE THOUGH SO
MAYBE SPECIFICALLY I WOULD
SUGGEST STRIKING GOLD FIVE
INTEGRATING GOLD SIXPACK INTO
GOLD FOR THE MIXED USE IN THE
RESIDENTIAL AND THEN YOU COULD
LEAVE BUT MODIFY FOR SEVEN AND
I THINK I THINK FIVE POINT TWO
IS IMPORTANT I I COULD TOTALLY
GET RID OF FIVE POINT ONE BUT I
THINK FIVE POINT TWO IS
IMPORTANT.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE RIGHT
STRATEGY IS AND I MIXED ABOUT
THE WHAT IS IN MY HEAD IS LIKE
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THAT ARE
SMELLY AND DIRTY AND THAT IS
THE WAY YOU NEED THEM VERSITY
LIKE IT FOR THE CITY TO OPERATE
AND LIKE I DON'T KNOW HOW TO DO
THAT.
I DON'T KNOW I DON'T I DON'T
KNOW HOW YOU DO THAT.
>> UM WELL YOU HAVE AN
INDUSTRIAL ZONE BUT WE DECIDED
TO INCLUDE RESIDENTIAL IN THE
INDUSTRIAL ZONE SO YEAH I WOULD
LIKE THE THE NUISANCE THING HAS
COME UP.
>> YEAH.
AND I WASN'T THERE TO ARGUE FOR
A MANUFACTURING ZONE.
SORRY.
SO YEAH.
AND I WOULD HAVE PROBABLY BEEN
IN THE MINORITY SO I APPRECIATE
HAVING SOMETHING ELSE LIKE I I
I SO THE IDEA THAT WE WOULD
THAT WE SHOULD BE THINKING
ABOUT THAT THIS IS NOT ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT MANUFACTURING
IT'S NOT SMELLY BUT I'M JUST
GOING TO SAY BECAUSE THIS IS
THE THING THAT I DEAL WITH ON A
DAILY BASIS WE NEED WE'RE GOING
TO NEED TO HAVE MORE CAR RENTAL
PLACES GUYS AND WE NEED TO HAVE
THEM MORE ACCESSIBLE LOCATIONS
AND THE CLOSURE OF DOWNTOWN
RENTAL CAR COMPANY IS REALLY
AWFUL FOR PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE
CARS.
WE NOW HAVE TO GO WAY OUT
OF THE CITY AND THAT'S NOT OK
IF WE WANT TO ACTUALLY
ENCOURAGE MORE PEOPLE TO LIVE
HERE WITHOUT CARS AND SO LIKE
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO THAT
THAT TAKES PLACE LIKE THAT'S
NOT SOMETHING THAT EVERYBODY
WANTS TO HAVE NEXT DOOR AND IF
WE ACTUALLY WANT TO LIVE
SUSTAINABLY WE'RE GOING TO MAKE
MORE SPACE FOR SOME OF THESE
THINGS.
>> SO OR WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
JUST SHIP THEM OUT TO THE
SUBURBS AND I DON'T THINK THAT
THAT'S A GOOD IDEA.
SO HAS A REALLY COOL LIKE MIXED
LIKE HOUSING ABOVE HERE.
IT'S BRAND NEW.
I MEAN TO DO ANYTHING ARE LIKE
JUST SETTING ASIDE A BIG SWATH
OF LAND FOR JUST A CAR RENTAL
PLACE.
>> YEAH.
WE GOT TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO DO
IT.
YEAH.
I MEAN IT'S THE GOOD NEWS IS
IT'S SUPER EASY TO LOSE CAR
RENTAL HOUSING NAME YOUR USE
ALL IN THE SAME DISTRICT.
>> THAT'S ACTUALLY REALLY EASY
TO DO.
THE CHALLENGE IS THAT DOWNTOWN
CAR RENTAL DOESN'T MEET THE
EASY ON PARKING MAXIMUM SO IT'S
EASY TO IDENTIFY USERS BUT
THERE'S WORK TO BE DONE IF YOU
IT'S EASY TO LIST THAT USE BUT
UNLESS UNLESS YOU MAKE IT AS WE
SAY IT HAS TO BE THE TORONTO
MODEL WHERE ALL THOSE CARS ARE
PARKED INSIDE A BUILDING THAT'S
TWO STORIES OR MORE YOU ARE
GOING TO FUNDAMENTALLY LIMIT
THE ABILITY FOR THAT TO BE
ACCOMPLISHED.
>> SO SO HOW CAN I PUT IN A
PLEA FOR KEEPING IN AND
DEVELOPING THIS CIRCULAR
ECONOMY?
IT BECAUSE NO, I DON'T THINK I
DID IT.
I THINK IT I THINK IT'S BEEN
PROBABLY LOBBIED FOR BY OSSI
BECAUSE THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY
STRATEGY IS A WEIRD PART OF THE
OSSI THING BECAUSE IT'S NOT
SOMETHING THAT YOU CAN BUY
SOLAR PANELS OR YOU KNOW IT IT
ACTUALLY AND SO THERE'S THIS
THING IN HERE THIS LITTLE GREEN
BOX LAND IS ESSENTIAL TO
TRANSITION FROM A LINEAR MODEL
TO A CIRCULAR ECONOMY.
I I UNDERSTAND BUT I THINK THAT
THERE'S SO MUCH MORE TO THAT
BECAUSE THE LINEAR MODEL IS WE
OUTSOURCE OUR TRASH DISPOSAL TO
PEOPLE YOU KNOW THE NEXT COUNTY
OVER BASICALLY I THINK IT'S
GOING TO YEAH.
AND UM AND SO THE FIRST OF ALL
IT'S NOT JUST AND SECOND OF ALL
IT'S NOT IT IT MEANS THAT WE'RE
IMPLICATED IN VEHICLES MILES
TRAVELED BECAUSE WE'RE SENDING
THAT STUFF OUT THERE AND THE
CIRCULAR ECONOMY IDEA IS THAT
YOU CAPTURE VALUE FROM THINGS
THAT SHOULDN'T BE LANDFILLED
YET AND IN ORDER TO CAPTURE
THAT VALUE YOU NEED PLACES TO
WORK ON THOSE THINGS.
AND SO IT GOES ALONG I THINK
WITH ONE WITH WHAT YOU WERE
SAYING BECAUSE WE'RE NOT USING
TITLES TONIGHT THAT YOU KNOW
THAT THE SPACE FOR THE EXAMPLE
THAT'S LISTED HERE IS SOMETHING
THAT WE HEARD A LOT FROM WHEN
WE WERE WORKING ON THE STRATEGY
FOR CIRCULAR ECONOMY WAS WE
COULD HAVE MORE THRIFT STORES
AND MORE STUFF IN THRIFT STORES
IN ANN ARBOR IF WE HAD PLACES
TO WAREHOUSE FURNITURE AND MORE
STUFF THAN WHAT THEY HAVE AT
THE AT THE THRIFT STORES, THEY
JUST CAN'T EVEN KEEP ALL THE
AMOUNT OF STUFF THAT THEY GET.
AND SO THIS IS AND I DON'T
THINK IT NEEDS 45 THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET OR ANYTHING.
AND AND I I THINK THAT, YOU
KNOW WELL I DON'T WANT TO
RELITIGATE THAT THING BUT I
THINK THAT WE COULD SAVE MORE
ABOUT HOW THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY
MEANS INTERNALIZING SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT WE CURRENTLY
EXTERNALIZE FOR LAND USES AND
THAT IT DOES MEAN THAT YOU WANT
A KIND OF LIGHT INDUSTRIAL.
>> YOU WANT TO BRING BACK SOME
STUFF LIKE REMEMBER THOSE TWO
HUGE REALLY LONG MEETINGS THAT
WE HAD WHEN WE TRIED TO
REDEFINE MAKERS OR OCCUPATIONS.
>> YEAH, I MEAN WE DID HAVE A
SIMILAR CONVERSATION ABOUT
NUISANCES AND THE KIND
OF TINKERING THAT PEOPLE DO AND
THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY NEEDS THAT
AND IT'S JUST BECAUSE WE
INTERNALIZED MORE OF OUR WASTE
AND WE ARE PRODUCING VALUE OUT
OF WASTE AND SO WE COULD SAY
MORE ABOUT WHAT SORT OF LAND
USE WOULD BE NEEDED.
AND I UNDERSTAND THAT THE IDEA
OF EXCLUDING HOUSING FROM
CERTAIN PLACES DIDN'T FLY VERY
WELL.
BUT YOU'RE AND I SPOKE HALF
AGAINST THAT WHICH I REGRET
THOSE WORDS BECAUSE AS I
THOUGHT ABOUT THESE OTHER
VALUES THERE, I THINK THEY DO
NEED SPACE AND I WATCHED HOW
HARD THE CITY HAD TO LOOK TO
FIND AN ELECTION CENTER AND I'M
GLAD WE HAVE IT BUT IT'S NOT
VERY ACCESSIBLE.
I MEAN THE CITY IS STARTING TO
HAVE MEETINGS THERE AND I CAN'T
BIKE THERE BECAUSE I'M GOING TO
GET KILLED AND I DON'T WANT
THAT.
SO I SHOULD HAVE SAID THAT
PUBLICLY.
I AM NERVOUS.
I AM A NERVOUS BIKER AND THAT
DOESN'T FEEL SAFE TO ME OTHERS
OF YOU WOULD FEEL AND SO WE'RE
WE'RE AT ODDS WITH, YOU KNOW,
THIS THIS ISSUE OF BIG ENOUGH
SQUARE FOOTAGE FOR CERTAIN
THINGS.
I THINK WE NEED AND I'M NOT
SAYING THAT WE NEED TO RESERVE
IT IN THE CENTER OF THE CITY
BUT I THINK IT'S SOMETHING THAT
I THINK A STRONGER ARGUMENT CAN
BE MADE FOR THAT IF WE WANT TO
KEEP THAT IN THERE THE CIRCULAR
ECONOMY THING.
>> SO THAT'S WHAT I WAS GOING
TO ASK IS I THINK WHAT I'M
HEARING IS REMOVED FIVE POINT
ONE BUT KEEP FIVE POINT TWO.
>> DOES THAT SOUND RIGHT?
I THINK SO.
EITHER SHRINK OR MODIFY WHAT'S
WRONG WITH FIVE POINT ONE?
IT DOESN'T SAY I MEAN SECURA
FAIRSHARE THE SPIN OFF AND
THAT'S LIKE YEAH WE SHOULD GET
SOMETHING OUT OF A UNIVERSITY.
>> YOU KNOW WE CAN'T TAXIN IF
IF THEY'RE INVESTING IN THINGS
LET'S TRY TO SEE IF WE CAN'T
GET SOME OF THAT IT MAYBE
DOESN'T NEED TO BE IT'S OWN THE
RIGHT AS PART OF LIKE FIVE
POINT TWO.
I THINK WHAT'S WRONG WITH IT IS
THAT IT SOUNDS LIKE A RATIONALE
FOR A ZONE THAT YOU ALREADY
SAID WE DIDN'T WANT.
>> YEAH WELL I UNDERSTAND IT
DOES WHEN WE GET TO SO WE COULD
JUST SAY WHEN WE GET TO THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX MAYBE WE
WILL REALIZE WHY WE DON'T IT
WILL BE CLEARER WHY WE DON'T
WANT IT HERE THAT THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF IT IS TO
CREATE AN INNOVATION DISTRICT
WHICH WE DON'T WANT I DON'T
WANT SORRY I I WANT TO BE
MODEST.
>> I WAS TRUSTING THAT THAT THE
INNOVATION ZONE WAS IN A
HOUSING PROHIBITIVE A
RESTRICTIVE INNOVATION ZONE WAS
NOT GOING TO HAPPEN AND SO BUT
PERHAPS THERE IS NO WAY TO
SECURE A FAIR SHARE OF SPIN OFF
WITHOUT I DON'T KNOW RESTRICT
HOUSING.
HOUSING ALWAYS WINS.
THAT'S WHAT WE'VE BEEN TOLD
CONSISTENTLY.
>> I THINK THINK OF IT THIS WAY
RESIDENTIAL HOUSING LIKE ON
AVERAGE YOUR AVERAGE RENTAL
RATE IN RAZIE IS GOING TO BE
ABOUT THREE DOLLARS A SQUARE
FOOT ANNUALIZED.
THAT'S THIRTY SIX DOLLARS A
SQUARE FOOT CURRENTLY DOWNTOWN
IF YOU WANT TO GET OFFICE SPACE
IT'S GOING TO BE IN A LOW 30S
IN THE HIGH 20S.
SO YOU'RE RIGHT, HOUSING IS
GOING TO YIELD A GREATER RATE
RIGHT AT SOME POINT.
BUT RETAIL IS GOING TO YIELD
LIKE MID 50S TRIPLE NET RIGHT.
SO WHY AND RETAIL WENT OUT
EVERY TIME BECAUSE THERE'S ALSO
A LOT COSTS INVOLVED WITH LIKE
RETURNING RETAIL, ET CETERA,
HOUSING IS A MORE RELIABLE KIND
OF MORE RISK AVERSE TYPE
OF PRODUCT RIGHT NOW.
>> BUT THAT'S NOT ALWAYS
NECESSARILY GOING TO BE THE
CASE ACTUALLY IN MOST PLACES
OFFICE GENERALLY IS A HIGHER
YIELD KIND OF PRODUCT.
IT JUST HAS DRASTICALLY CHANGED
DURING COVID SO I DON'T KNOW
THAT LIKE HOUSING IS ALWAYS
LIKE THERE MAY BE A TIME I HATE
WHEN SOMEBODY COMES TO YOU AND
SAYS HEY I WANT TO TAKE ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
LIKE I
DO A BILL TO SUE FOR YOU
IF IT'S GOT A HIGH CREDIT
TENANT AND YOU'RE ABLE TO
SECURE LIKE THEN GOOGLE TAKING
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY SIX THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET UP ON NORTH CAMPUS.
>> RIGHT.
YOU PROBABLY RATHER DO THAT
THAN DEAL WITH KIND OF THE
MANAGEMENT OF AN APARTMENT
BUILDING FOR EXAMPLE.
SO IT'S NOT NECESSARILY ALWAYS
GOING TO BE THE CASE.
WHAT THIS MEANS PACIFICALLY FOR
THIS DOCUMENT.
I DO I DO AGREE IT'S KIND OF A
COMPRESSION OF SOME OF THESE
CONCEPTS.
I JUST WHAT I'M OBJECTING TO IS
THAT IT BE REMOVED FROM
CONSIDERATION AS A WHOLE
BECAUSE I DO THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR THE CITY'S
OVERALL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO
THINK ABOUT THIS OVER THE NEXT
TWENTY FIVE YEARS.
YOU CAN MAKE SIMILAR
OBSERVATIONS.
>> I'M STILL STUDYING THE
BACKGROUND RATIONALE.
I'M HEARING DIFFERENT REASONS
FOR WHY WE INCLUDE THIS THE
MAYBE LINEUP WITH THE GOAL IS
IT SOUNDS LIKE ONE THE
RATIONALE IS IS TO DIVERSIFY
THE TAX BASE.
YES.
ANOTHER IS TO MAKE SURE THE
CITY IS PROVIDING THE KINDS
OF THINGS THAT CITIES NEED TO
PROVIDE FOR CITIES TO FUNCTION
THAT SOMETIMES AREN'T THE BEST
NEIGHBORS BUT WE SHOULD STILL
PROVIDE FOR THEM.
AND THEN THE THIRD IS THE SENSE
THAT WE NEED TO HAVE SPACE FOR
REALLY BIG MANUFACTURING KIND
OF STUFF MAYBE OR SPIN OFFS.
>> I'M NOT SURE AND YEAH AND
WE'RE TRYING TO DO ALL OF THIS
AT THE SAME TIME AND MOST I GET
THE I GET THE CONCERN THAT
THERE'S A HUGE IMBALANCE RIGHT
NOW BETWEEN JOBS AND HOUSING
AND WE SHOULD FOCUS ON THE
HOUSING BUT I AM NERVOUS AT THE
TWENTY FIVE YEAR PLAN AND I
DON'T THINK I WANT TO JETTISON
COMPLETELY THE ABILITY FOR THE
CITY TO SEE THINGS AND AND
RESPOND TO THAT AND I ALSO AM
SYMPATHETIC WE OUGHT TO MAKE
THE CITY HAVE THE THINGS IN IT
THAT MAKE CITIES FUNCTION AND
WE OUGHT TO I DON'T KNOW
SOMEHOW FIGURE OUT HOW TO
INCLUDE SPACE FOR THAT.
UM SO I'M NOT SURE I WANT TO
JETTISON ALL I DON'T AGREE WITH
JUDGES IN ALL OF US.
I'M ALSO KIND OF LOOKING AT
THIS WHOLE SIX THINGS.
I THINK IT'S A GREAT IDEA TO
REALLY ENCOURAGE MIXED USE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE HUGE HONKIN
BIG PARKING LOT MALLS THAT WE
HAVE RIGHT NOW THAT INCLUDE
LOTS OF RESIDENTIAL BUT A LOT
OF OTHER STUFF THEY WOULD GO
TOGETHER.
I DON'T WANT TO JETTISON THOSE
CALLS OR AND I DON'T THINK THAT
THE SAME THING IS WHAT WE
TALKED ABOUT ABOVE NEIGHBORHOOD
COMMERCIAL JEFFERSON MARKET IS
NOT WHAT THIS IS TALKING ABOUT
EXPANDING THE DOWNTOWN
DISTRICT.
THAT'S A REALLY IMPORTANT
SENTENCE THAT WE NEED IN HERE.
>> YEAH.
SO I GUESS I'M KIND OF AND I I
THINK THE BACKGROUND
EXPLANATION ABOUT THE ECONOMIC
CONSIDERATIONS IS USEFUL TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S GOING ON HERE
AND WHAT NEW WHAT TIME AND
GUESS AND PUSHING BACK AND MY
GOOD FRIEND THEN I'LL HERE A
LITTLE BIT.
>> YEAH ABSOLUTELY.
I MEAN I'M HAPPY TO TELL YOU
WHY SIX POINT TWO SHOULD GO
THIS BECAUSE IT EMBODIES A CORE
ORIENTATION THAT'S ALL.
>> BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT I'M
READING WHEN I SAY SURE BUT WE
JUST HAD OURSELF WITH TWENTY
THREE HUNDRED PARKING SPACES
THEY'RE GOING TO DO WITH A SORT
OF CAR CENTRIC THERE'S A LOT
OF WALKABILITY BUT THEY'RE
STILL A CAR CENTRAL CITY.
THEY'RE THE REDEVELOPMENT
BRIARWOOD WHICH IS GOING TO PUT
WHAT FOUR HUNDRED UNITS
OF HOUSING.
THEY BUILT A FOUR STORY PARKING
DECK RIGHT IN THE CENTER
BECAUSE THE LARGE RETAILER
REQUIRES A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF PARKING SPOTS IN ORDER FOR
THEM TO BE VIABLE.
>> SO I AGREE LIKE IN THEORY
THIS IS WONDERFUL.
THIS IS OUR GOAL OF , YOU KNOW,
TAKING PARKING I THINK
COMMISSIONER DISH THINGS THE
JONI MITCHELL SONG A LOT ABOUT
CONVERTING OUR PARKING LOT BUT
WHAT IT WINDS DOING IS JUST
REINVESTING INTO THE BUILT
APARTMENT.
>> WHAT WOULD YOU FOR THAT
SPACE IF NOT THIS?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT IS A
WONDERFUL CONVERSATION FOR US
TO HAVE AND SO WHICH I WOULD BE
INTERESTED ENGAGING RIGHT NOW
I'M LOOKING AT WHAT'S IN FRONT
OF ME AND WHAT'S IN FRONT
OF ME.
I THINK THAT'S THE CARSON
TRAGEDY WHICH IS WHY I WAS
RECOMMENDING THAT IT BE REMOVED
.
I'M YEAH, I'M JUST WE'RE
HOPPING AROUND A LITTLE AND SO
I DO WE WANT TO START ON GOAL
FIVE AND CLARIFY LIKE WHAT I
WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO SUGGEST
FOR GO FIVE IS WHAT I AM
HEARING IS MIXED FEEDBACK ON IT
BUT IF I WERE GOING TO GET INTO
ALL OF YOUR INDIVIDUAL BRAINS
THIS IS THE WHAT I CAN LIVE
WITH THAT I'M THINKING MOST
OF YOU HAVE IS YOU WANT IT TO
BE SHORTER, YOU WANT SOME
DOCUMENTATION ABOUT IT SO THAT
IT SHOULD BE IN THERE.
IT SHOULD BE PERHAPS LESS LAND
FOCUSED AND MORE OUTCOME
FOCUSED AND MAGICALLY MAKE IT
SHORTER BUT STILL INCLUDE ALL
THE BACKGROUND INFORMATION THAT
COMMISSIONER GORDON FINDS
USEFUL.
SO THAT'S THAT'S HOW YOU
PROCESSING FIVE THINGS THAT
SEEM GENERALLY I MEAN FIVE
ITSELF IS IT LONG?
IT'S THE LEAD UP TO FIVE, SIX,
SEVEN LIKE THAT.
>> IT'S FIVE IS ONE THERE'S TWO
PAGES.
YEAH.
>> SO I THINK IT'S MORE THE
FIVE, SIX, SEVEN AND THIS IS
WHERE WHAT COMMISSIONER MORTON
SAID ABOUT WHAT WE WERE TALKING
ABOUT WHICH IS LIKE NEEDING ALL
OF THE THINGS YOU SAID THREE
THINGS IN THE LAST ONE WE WERE
LIKE NO NOT MANUFACTURING.
YES.
WELL I'M ONE AND TWO WHATEVER
YOU SAID FOR THOSE ONE AND TWO
I THINK WE'RE THE TAX THE TAX
DIVERSIFICATION WITH A DIVERSE
ECONOMY IN THE CITY AND WANTING
TO DO ALL OF THE THINGS LIKE BE
ABLE TO THE SERVICES THE CITY
NEEDS.
>> I THINK THAT WE REWRITE TO
THINGS TO EMPHASIZE HERE
THERE'S A LOT OF HERE ON THE
DIVERSITY OF THE TAX BASE
PROBABLY MORE THAN THERE NEEDS
TO BE NOT MUCH ABOUT MAKING
SURE WE'RE PROVIDING THE THINGS
THAT CITIES NEED TO FUNCTION AS
CITIES AND WE'RE NOT A
MANUFACTURER.
I WAS I WAS HEADING TOWARDS
SAYING I DON'T WE SHOULDN'T BE
TRYING TO BUILD IN BIG
MANUFACTURING PLANTS IN THE
CITY KNOW.
BUT AND MAYBE I WAS KIND
OF PICKING UP ON THE LARGE THE
CLOSET SPACE AND STUFF TO
CLARIFY AND THAT TYPE OF USE
MIGHT BE SOMEBODY WHO
PROTOTYPING SOMETHING THAT HAS
TO BE MANUFACTURED SOMEWHERE
ELSE.
RIGHT.
BUT I'M NOT THINKING ABOUT IS A
CAR DYE PLANT OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT WHERE IT'S JUST STAMPING
METALS AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
WHAT I'M THINKING ABOUT IS SOME
OF THESE COMPANIES ARE LIKE
INTERNET SOFTWARE COMPANIES OR
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOLKS
OR ARE CREATING THE NEXT
GENERATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE
FOR FEDEX TRUCKS.
>> RIGHT.
NEW FACTORY OR OFFICE JOBS
THEY'RE DOING PROTOTYPING AS
WELL AS LIKE SO THEY ARE DOING
ON THEIR DESIGN.
>> IT'S A TECHNICAL CENTER AND
YET DESIGN IS AN INNOVATION
CENTER ESSENTIALLY AND IT'S
LIKE THOSE ARE THE TYPES
OF THINGS THAT WE DO INNOVATION
IS IMPORTANT.
I JUST DON'T KNOW THAT WE ARE
GOING TO CREATE THIS EXCLUSIVE
AREA FOR THAT DOESN'T SEEM TO
MAKE SENSE BUT THAT'S NOT TO
SAY THAT WE REJECT INNOVATION.
RIGHT?
THAT'S NOT WHAT I'M TRYING TO
SAY.
>> AND SO YOU'VE GOT TWO GROUPS
OF COMMERCIAL THINGS GOING ON
HERE.
ONE IS PRETTY NONE OF OFFENSIVE
OFFICE SPACE LIKE THINGS THAT
YOU DON'T REALLY KNOW WHAT'S
GOING ON IN THE BUILDING.
IT DOESN'T MATTER BECAUSE IT
DOESN'T BOTHER THE NEIGHBORS.
BUT THEN YOU ALSO HAVE THE
RECYCLE CENTER THAT'S MAYBE GOT
SOME NOISE GOING IN, SOME
SMELLS COMING IN AND OUT AND
AND FOR THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY
THING FOR A CITY TO FUNCTION
LIKE A CITY WANTS TO FUNCTION,
YOU MAYBE WANT TO HAVE SOME
OF THAT IN THE CITY AND NOT
FORCE EVERYBODY TO DRIVE TO
TOWNSHIPS OVER IT TO GET TO IT
.
>> HOW DO WE RECONCILE THOSE
THINGS CIRCULAR ECONOMY GRAPHIC
UP.
>> SO I THINK TO SUMMARIZE KIND
OF WHAT WE ARE DISCUSSING IS WE
THINK THAT PAGE IS EFFECTIVELY
SIXTY FOUR TO SIXTY EIGHT AND
EIGHT AND SIXTY NINE ARE THAT'S
A VERY LONG LEAD UP INTO IT
MAYBE COMPRESSED SOME OF THOSE
THINGS ABOUT LIKE HEY THIS IS
WHAT YOU HAVE IS DOING.
I DON'T KNOW THAT THAT'S
NECESSARILY NEEDED.
TAKE A LOOK AT COMPRESSING SOME
OF THESE KIND OF ITEMS BUT THAT
THE GOALS OF UNCOMPRESS FIVE
POINT ONE IN FIVE POINT TWO
TOGETHER WHERE IT'S I GUESS WE
SHOULD SECURE TECH TRANSFER
ACTIVITY IF POSSIBLE WITHIN THE
CITY TO DIVERSIFY INNOVATION
AND SOCIOECONOMIC WAGE MOBILITY
5.2 I THINK IMPORTANT TO AND IN
THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY COMPONENT
AS WELL.
>> UM, BUT STROKE THE NEWS WE
IN THE NUISANCE LAWS.
>> YEAH.
>> I DON'T KNOW THAT WE SHOULD
BE REVIEWING OR AND AND I THINK
THE LIKE ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
I RAN INTO FOR EXAMPLE WAS LIKE
THE WAY OFFICES ARE USED ARE
DIFFERENT.
ONE OF THE THINGS I RAN INTO
WITH KAYLEIGH WAS THEY WANT TO
DO CLEANROOM WHERE THEY HAD A
NITROGEN GAS TANK AND IT'S
TECHNICALLY CONSIDERED KIND
OF A LAB RACE AND LAB AREA.
BUT LABS AREN'T PERMITTED IN
OFFICE CELLS FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT IT IS YOU KNOW WHAT THEY
DON'T LIKE I GUESS WHAT THE
ZONING DOESN'T WANT IS LIKE
LABORATORIES LIKE WET LABS
WHERE THINGS CHEMICALS ARE
BEING MIXED.
THIS IS ACTUALLY THE CLEANEST
ROOM.
IT'S A CLEAN IT'S A CLASS ONE
HUNDRED AND ONE THOUSAND ROOM.
>> RIGHT.
AND THIS IS ONE OF THE CLEANEST
PLACES EVER.
RIGHT.
AND SO THE WAY THAT I THINK
NUISANCES LIKE THE WAY THAT
OFFICE UTILIZATION HAS EVOLVED
OVER TIME HAS CHANGED AND I
DON'T THINK THAT ARE PERMITTED
USES IN OUR ZONING HAS REALLY
KIND OF LIKE CAUGHT UP.
>> I MEAN LIKE YOU AND I HAVE
TALKED ABOUT THIS PREVIOUSLY.
>> RIGHT, BECAUSE THESE ARE THE
TYPES OF JOBS SEMICONDUCTOR
MANUFACTURING DIE WAFER
EFFICIENCIES PROCESS
OPTIMIZATIONS FOR
SEMICONDUCTORS.
THESE ARE THE THINGS KINDS
OF THINGS THAT WE WANT TO HAVE
EXPORT ECONOMIES.
RIGHT.
AND SO THOSE ARE THE THINGS
THAT WE DO WANT TO ENCOURAGE
AND HAVE INNOVATIONS EXPORT
ECONOMIES IMPORTANT THAT'S WHAT
MAKES ANN ARBOR ATTRACTIVE.
>> WE SHOULD TRY TO HARNESS
SOME OF THAT FOR THE FUTURE
.
>> SO I THINK THAT THAT BEING
SAID, YOU KNOW, WE'VE ASKED
THAT QUESTION WHERE DON'T WE
WANT HOUSING?
>> RIGHT.
AND IT'S NO I MEAN HOUSING CAN
BE EVERYWHERE BUT THERE'S GOING
TO BE TIMES WHERE THOSE THOSE
SPECIFIC USES ARE GOING TO BE
MORE CONDUCIVE OR THE
DEVELOPERS ARE GOING TO SAY OK,
THIS IS THE KIND OF DEVELOPMENT
THAT I WANT TO DO SO ALL
OF THAT TO SAY IF I WERE TO
SUMMARIZE EVERYTHING ONE FIVE
WENT TO A LOT OF THIS CAN BE
KIND OF COMBINED AND COMPRESSED
I THINK THAT'S KIND OF OVERALL
JUST AT LEAST I'M GETTING THAT
CIRCULAR ECONOMY SHOULD BE A
PART OF KIND OF LIKE THE
CONCEPT THAT WE MOVE FORWARD
WHEN WE MOVE TO GOAL NUMBER SIX
.
>> I YEAH I PERSONALLY I
TOTALLY UNDERSTAND THAT YOU
DON'T WANT TO PROMOTE MORE AUTO
CENTRICITY.
>> RIGHT.
AND THAT THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
YOU HAVE A PHILOSOPHICAL I SURE
WISH THAT YOU HAVE YOU DON'T
WANT TO SUPPORT THAT
WHATSOEVER.
>> THAT BEING SAID FOR ME THESE
STRATEGIES DO MAKE SENSE TO ME.
>> I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE DO WANT TO IGNORE.
BUT WE BUILT SHOULD WE YEAH.
>> BECAUSE I MEAN THE OTHER
THING THAT I WAS TRYING TO
BRING UP THAT I HADN'T THOUGHT
THROUGH YET WAS THE TAX BASE
PER ACRE ON SOME OF THIS
COMMERCIAL IS ALSO SOMETHING WE
SHOULD CONSIDER SO YOU KNOW,
THE STANDARD PRODUCES MORE IN
TAX REVENUE THAN ARBOR LANDO'S
AND SO WHEN WE LOOK AT PER ACRE
WHEN WE LOOK AT THAT AND WE
TALK ABOUT DIVERSIFYING THE TAX
BASE, DOES THAT COME INTO PLACE
BECAUSE YOU HAVE AN ENTITY THAT
IS PRODUCING MORE TAX REVENUE
ON LESS LAND AND SINCE THIS IS
A LAND USE DOCUMENT WHEN WE
THINK ABOUT THAT THAT THOSE ARE
THE KINDS OF THINGS SO WHEN I
SEE SIX POINT TWO THAT'S WHAT
I'M THINKING OF THIS LIKE SURE
WE WANT TO RETROFIT THAT BUT
IT'S NOT PRODUCING THE SAME
KIND OF TAX REVENUE THAT
SOMETHING THAT WOULD BE MORE
DENSE COULD AND THEN I THINK
THERE IS AGREEMENT AT THE TABLE
THAT WE SHOULD GET RID OF SIX
POINT THREE SO IF THERE'S NOT
AGREEMENT AT SIX POINT TWO, I
THINK THERE IS AGREEMENT TO GET
RID OF THE INNOVATION.
>> IS THERE A WAY TO REVISE SIX
POINT TWO SO THAT THREAD THE
NEEDLE?
YES, I WOULD TRUST THE PLANNING
STAFF TO THREAD THAT NEEDLE IN
CONCERT WITH OUR CONSULTANTS TO
DO IT IN A WAY THAT DOESN'T
PROMOTE AUTOS BECAUSE I MEAN I
DON'T THINK ANYBODY HERE WANTS
TO PROMOTE AUTO CENTRIC
DEVELOPMENT.
>> HOW SORRY I WAS TO PROMOTING
CENTRIC DEVELOPMENT.
>> I THINK IT'S LIKE I THINK
OF OUR SOUTH AS AN EXAMPLE OR
BUT THAT IS THERE LIKE THERE
ARE NO PARKING MINIMUMS RIGHT.
>> THEY MADE A CHOICE THAT
PARKING MAXIMUMS THAT ARE WAY
LIKE IT SEEMS WHAT YOU'RE
GETTING AT IS YOU DON'T LIKE
OUR PARKING.
>> WE WE DON'T HAVE PARKING
MAXIMUM IN THE TAXI.
WELL AND YOU SEE WHAT WE DO
SORRY.
OK AND WE'RE UNDER IT.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL LET'S GO BACK AND TALK
ABOUT HOW LARGE THOSE MAXIMUM
TOURS THAT THIS IS.
THIS IS USING CAR DESIGN AREAS
WE WANT TO REIMAGINE I'M AT WE
ABSOLUTELY ARE IN AGREEMENT
THAT WE WANT TO REIMAGINE CAR
AREAS BUT I ALSO THINK THAT
TAKE THE REDEVELOPMENT
OF BRIARWOOD THEY HAD TO BUILD
A FOUR STORY PARKING STRUCTURE
AND SO TO ME THERE IS SOME AND
EMBEDDING OF THE CARS AND
MORALITY THERE SO THAT I THINK
CHARLIE ARTICULATED WELL WHEN
HE TRIED TO SUMMARIZE MY
COMMENTS WHICH IS I HAVE A
PHILOSOPHICAL OBJECTION TO IT.
I HAVE A PHILOSOPHICAL
OBJECTION TO IT.
YOU CAN THE TABLE COULD DECIDE
WELL LET'S KEEP IT UP SO AND
LET ME THINK ABOUT HOW WE GET
HIGHER DENSITY DEVELOPMENT IN
THESE SPACES AND THAT IS NOT TO
RETROFIT THAT IS TO TEAR DOWN
AND CREATE ACTUAL GRID RIGHT.
EXTEND LIKE SO IT'S ACTUALLY
THE WORD RETROFITTING MAYBE
BECAUSE THAT IS EFFECTIVELY
ASSUMING LIKE YOU STILL HAVE A
MORE PROPERTY AND YOU'RE SAYING
MAYBE WE DON'T WANT THE MORE
RIGHT OR OR OR WE DON'T WE
STILL HAVE SEVEN SEVEN SEVEN
MAYBE MAYBE WE DON'T WANT SEVEN
SEVEN SEVEN.
RIGHT WELL I WILL JUST SAY MY
WIFE WHEN I EXPLAINED THE
DEVELOPMENT TO HER I WAS
SHOCKED THAT THEY HAD TO
REPLACE THE PARKING.
SO SHE WAS OH THIS IS GOING TO
BE GREAT.
THEY'RE GOING TO USE THESE
UNDERUTILIZED PARKING LOTS AND
I SAID ACTUALLY WE'RE BUILDING
UP THE PARKING LOT.
THEY'RE PUTTING THE PRESSURE
BACK IN.
AND SO SHE WAS JUST SHOCKED
BECAUSE IT DIDN'T MAKE SENSE IN
THAT REGARD AND SO I COULD BE
AN OUTLIER.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT WOULD YOU ALL
SUPPORT BECAUSE I THINK THE
LANGUAGE HERE MAYBE YOU WANT
BETTER STANDARDS AS TO WHAT
RETROFITTING MEANS LIKE CAR
CENTRIC IS A GREAT PLACE TO
REGULATE DEVELOPMENT THAT IS
LESS CAR CENTRIC.
THAT'S WHAT THIS IS GOING TO BE
SAID THAT I TRUST YOU AND I
THINK YOU HAVE YOU HAVE YOUR
LIVING INSIDE MY HEAD RIGHT
NOW.
SO I APPRECIATE BUT THERE'S A
LOT IN THIS PARAGRAPH THAT I
THINK IS REALLY IMPORTANT.
>> I DON'T THINK WE WOULD
STRENGTH THE PARAGRAPH OK?
I THINK WE'LL JUST TRY TO
REWORK THIS BECAUSE IT DOES
MAKE CLEAR THAT INVESTMENT IN
INFRASTRUCTURE IS IMPORTANT TO
DO THIS AND WHAT ABOUT SIX
POINT THREE?
IS THERE A CONSENSUS TO STRIKE
THAT I WOULD SUPPORT STRIKING
PLUS ONE?
>> I DON'T I WOULDN'T STRIKE IT
TO YOU.
I'LL JUST GET RID OF A WHOLE
PAGE.
I'M YEAH.
OK, SO WE'RE ON GOAL SEVEN OR
IS THERE.
YEP.
YES.
SO CAN YOU HELP ME UNDERSTAND
THAT PRESERVE DOESN'T MEAN SET
ASIDE LAND THE SEVEN POINT ONE
YEAR
.
SO I THINK THIS IS THE SAME
THING WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
IF WE DO YOU CARE ABOUT THE WE
WANT TO TAKE STEPS TO MAKE IT
MORE VIABLE FOR THE ENTIRE
PAPITO SHOP TO CONTINUE IN THAT
DISTRICT OR NOT.
I THINK IF THIS WAS AN
OPPORTUNITY ZONE LIKE THE CITY
HAD IT AND THEN THEY WERE ABLE
TO LOWER THE RENTS SO THAT
ENTREPRENEURS COULD MOVE INTO
IT, I THINK I WOULD BE ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT IN SUPPORT THAT
BECAUSE NOW WE ARE DOING
SOMETHING PROACTIVE FOR LOCAL
BUSINESSES USING LAND AS THE
TOOL TO INCENTIVIZE THAT.
BUT IF WE ARE JUST SETTING
ASIDE LAND THAT IS INTERESTING.
>> I DON'T I DON'T NEED THIS TO
SAY SETTING ASIDE LAND THAT'S
WHY I ASKED.
>> YEAH, TO PRESERVE THAT
SETTING ASIDE BECAUSE I WOULD
YOU DO IT IF WE'RE NOT GOING TO
CARVE OUT SPACES FOR MORE
AFFORDABLE STUFF WE BUY I THINK
IT'S MORE PRIVATELY OWNED
ASSETS AND INDUSTRIAL SPACE.
SO NO, I MEAN IT'S IN THE
BUDGET.
I MEAN WE'RE MR. TONY ANNOUNCED
WHAT DID HE END UP PUTTING IN
THE BUDGET?
OVER A MILLION, RIGHT.
FIVE MILLION.
RIGHT.
FIVE MILLION OFF THE AS YET
UNSOLD PLEIN LOT.
BUT THAT THAT'S WHAT I
UNDERSTAND WHEN I READ WHEN I
READ PRESERVE BECAUSE I BECAUSE
THE COLOR TURNED RED I THOUGHT
I WAS DONE AND I DIDN'T READ
THIS PART AND I FEEL REALLY BAD
ABOUT THAT READING IT NOW I'M
READING IT NOW AND WHEN I SAW
THE GRAPHIC DESIGN PROBLEM THAT
IS NOT YOUR FAULT.
>> THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW PRESERVER VARIETY
OF SPACE.
I MEAN THIS IS WHAT HE IS
TALKING ABOUT OUT HIS
VOCABULARY WAS PROACTIVELY
BUYING THINGS WHEN THEY COME ON
THE MARKET SO THAT WE CAN DO
THIS WITH THEM.
SO LET'S SAY SOMEBODY WANTS TO
SELL THAT SHOPPING CENTER THAT
THE THRIFT STORE IS IN.
THE CITY MIGHT BUY IT SO THAT
WE CAN BECOME THE LANDFILL.
WE SAY THAT ABSOLUTELY.
BUT I'VE GOT TO BE REAL THAT IF
LAND USE FRAMEWORK IS SUCH THAT
RESIDENTIAL IS MORE ENTICING
THERE THE FINANCIAL REALITY
OF THE CITY CHOOSING TO BUY IT
VERSUS HOUSING TO COME IN THERE
MIGHT BE DIFFERENTIAL.
IT'S IT'S POSSIBLE BUT I THINK
THE FOCUS SHOULD BE IF IF YOU
DON'T WANT TO USE LAND USE
REGULATIONS TO DO IT, LET'S BE
CLEAR ABOUT THAT LIKE I THINK
THIS IS INTENDED TO SAY I THINK
IT MIGHT BE VALUABLE TO FIND
THE SPACES.
THIS IS ALSO I THINK TALKING
ABOUT LIKE YOU KNOW, THE
ZINGERMAN'S SPHERE
OF BUSINESSES.
MANY OF THEM CAN'T AREN'T
LOCATED IN THE CITY BECAUSE
THEY FOUND MORE AFFORDABLE
SPACE SOMEWHERE ELSE.
WE DON'T HAVE TO DO IT FROM A
LAND-USE PERSPECTIVE.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE A GOAL.
IT COULD BE FROM TRYING TO PUT
MORE FLEXIBILITY SO A CAR
RENTAL PLACE DOESN'T HAVE TO
ABIDE BY A MAXIMUM PARKING
RATIO SO THAT THEY CAN MORE
VIABLY CREATE A RENTAL FACILITY
WITHOUT BUILDING A GARAGE TO
HOUSE ALL THE VEHICLES OR WE
COULD SAY NO, WE CARE MORE
ABOUT FORM AND SIDEWALK
EXPERIENCE THAN WE DO ABOUT THE
VIABILITY OF THE RENTAL COMPANY
GOING THERE.
SO I THINK THE MOST HELPFUL
THING HERE WOULD JUST BE WHAT
WHAT DO YOU DESIRE?
IS THIS A GOAL AND IF SO, DO
YOU WANT TO USE LAND USE
REGULATION GENERALLY I WOULD
SAY WHATEVER ON THIS QUESTION
IS YOU DO NOT WANT TO DO THAT.
YOU MIGHT WANT TO LIMIT IT JUST
TO THE CITY HAVING TO FIND
FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO DO SO,
WHICH IS AN ALREADY THING LIKE
NOT EVERYTHING IN OUR PLAN IS A
ZONING INSTRUMENT.
RIGHT.
ZONING IS NOT THE SOLUTION FOR
EVERYTHING.
>> I'M HEARING YOU CORRECTLY.
YOU'RE SAYING THAT THE CITY IS
NOW DOING SOMETHING THAT IT'S
NEVER DONE BEFORE WHICH IS
PUTTING ASIDE MONEY TO BUY
STUFF.
YEAH.
AND IF WE WANT THAT STUFF TO BE
REMOTELY AFFORDABLE TO THE CITY
WE MIGHT WANT TO CONSIDER WHAT
IT'S OWNED BY.
>> I'M JUST SAYING THAT THERE
ARE OTHER FACTORS BESIDES THE
CITY'S WILLINGNESS DO THAT
RIGHT.
>> AND ONE OF THE OTHER FACTORS
WOULD BE
IS IT IS IT ZONED IN A
WAY THAT WE HAVE TO COMPETE
AGAINST, YOU KNOW, OR ARE YOU
WILLING TO COMPETE AGAINST WELL
TOO RIGHT.
>> I MEAN, YOU KNOW, FIVE
MILLION IS A LOT AND I WANT TO
BE CLEAR I'M NOT A REAL ESTATE
PROFESSIONAL SO I BUT I MIGHT
SPECULATION IS IS THE CITY'S
PURCHASE PRICE FOR AN OLD STRIP
MALL AND SOUTH INDUSTRIAL TO
PRESERVE AFFORDABLE COMMERCIAL
OR FLEX SPACE MIGHT BE A
DIFFERENT VALUE FRAMEWORK THAN
SOMEBODY WHO'S PROPOSING TO PUT
TWO HUNDRED APARTMENTS THERE.
THAT'S MY ONLY POINT.
>> SO I'M LOOKING AT I'VE JUST
BEEN LOOKING AT SOME OTHER
COMPREHENSIVE PLANS AND THIS
ONE IS POLDER AND THEY HAVE A
SECTION THAT'S AFFORDABLE
BUSINESS SPACE AND DIVERSE
EMPLOYMENT BASE AND IT JUST
SAYS THE CITY WILL CONSIDER
STRATEGIES, REGULATIONS,
POLICIES OR NEW PROGRAMS TO
MAINTAIN A RANGE OF OPTIONS TO
SUPPORT A DIVERSE WORKFORCE,
WORKFORCE AND EMPLOYMENT BASE
AND TAKE INTO ACCOUNT
INNOVATIONS IN THE CHANGING
NATURE OF THE WORKPLACE LIKE UH
I MEAN I LIKE THAT.
YEAH, FOR SURE.
LIKE IT'S YOU KNOW, IT DOESN'T
IT DOESN'T RELATE TO ANYTHING
RIGHT.
>> IS THE LEVEL OF VAGUENESS
THAT WE MIGHT BE LOOKING FOR.
EXACTLY LIKE IT'S LIKE HEY WE
KNOW WE NEED TO DO THIS.
YEAH THERE MIGHT BE DIFFERENT
WAYS OF DOING IT FOR DIFFERENT
BUSINESSES IN DIFFERENT AREAS
AT DIFFERENT TIMES.
>> RIGHT.
BUT ALSO IT'S PROBABLY NOT US
SOMEBODY ELSE WE'RE PASSING
THIS DOCUMENT TO SOMEBODY ELSE
TAKE THIS FROM US.
>> RIGHT.
I MEAN THIS IS A TOPIC WE'RE
HAVING SOME AMBIGUITY IS GOOD
BECAUSE WE DON'T KNOW HOW
CONDITIONS ARE GOING TO CHANGE
OR WHAT KIND OF BUSINESSES
MIGHT SHOW UP THAT REALLY COULD
BE USEFUL AND MAYBE THERE'S A
PARTY THAT YOU KNOW, IT'S EASY
FOR A RENTAL PLACE THAT DOESN'T
NEED TO HAVE THE MAXIMUM
PARKING SPOT.
SO I THINK THIS IS ACTUALLY A
GOOD PLACE WHERE AMBIGUITY AND
NOT BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO
FOISTED ON FUTURE COMMISSIONS
BUT BECAUSE THEY'RE WE'RE GOING
TO BE THE ONES WHO ARE DEALING
WITH THIS SITUATION THAT'S COME
UP THAT WE CAN ANTICIPATE NOW.
BUT IT'S GOOD TO CONTEMPLATE
THAT AND PUT THAT MEMORIALIZED
THAT ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT WE
SHOULD BE PREPARED TO ADDRESS
THOSE THINGS.
SO THIS IS ALL AROUND WELL, I'M
BE SAID AMBIGUITY WOULD BE GOOD
HERE.
>> I WOULD JUST NOTE THAT WHAT
FOUR SEVEN POINT ONE AND SEVEN
POINT TWO AND THIS ENTIRE GOAL
ARE ABOUT UM WELL MAYBE MAYBE
JUST SEVEN POINT ONE IN SEVEN
TO FOUR SPECIFICALLY LOCAL
ENTREPRENEURS.
>> MM HMM.
RIGHT.
SO LIKE WHERE SEVEN POINT THREE
IS IS MORE ABOUT LIKE EMERGING
OPPORTUNITIES NOT NECESSARILY
LOCAL ENTREPRENEURS AND I DON'T
KNOW IF THAT'S INTENTIONAL
BECAUSE THAT CAR RENTAL PLACE
IF IT'S AN ENTERPRISE
RENT-A-CAR.
RIGHT.
IT'S NOT THAT THAT'S NOT WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT FOR SEVEN
POINT ONE IN TERMS OF MAKING
SURE THAT THE THINGS THAT MAKE
THAT CITY COMPLETE WE ARE
FINDING SUPPORT FOR AND SO IF
WE WANT SOMETHING LIKE MAKING
THE CITY COMPLETE THEN I FEEL
LIKE THAT MIGHT BE SOMETHING
THAT WE NEED TO WORK IN TO LOOK
INTO A REVISED GOAL.
FIVE DOES THAT MAKE SENSE?
IT DOES EXCEPT THERE IS
SOMETHING THAT COMES TO MY MIND
AS I NOW READ THIS ONE WHICH IS
THE AGREEMENT THAT IT HAS.
IT'S THE CLIMATE COMMITMENT
THAT GOES ALONG WITH THE
RENEGOTIATED GAS FRANCHISE AND
IT SAYS THAT WE'RE WORKING WITH
WE GOT MONEY OUT OF DTG TO
SUPPORT HER WORK WITH UNIONS TO
TRAIN PEOPLE TO MAKE GEOTHERMAL
AND THAT THAT SEEMS TO ME THE
CITY CAN HELP ENSURE THE
SKILLED TRADES ARE ABLE TO MEET
THE COMING DEVELOPMENT OF BY
WORKING WITH COUNTY
INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS ON
TRAINING OR PROGRAMING.
>> THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT'S
WRITTEN INTO THAT AGREEMENT.
HMM.
>> CAN I TRY A RECAP?
>> YES.
OK, SO SEVEN POINT ONE WE WANT
TO SORT OF REMOVE REFERENCES TO
THIS BEING LANU SPACE AND USE
SOME SORT OF LANGUAGE SIMILAR
TO WHAT WE'VE HEARD IN BOULDER
AND MAYBE DISCUSS NOW THAT WE
HAVE A BUDGET TO ACQUIRE THINGS
THAT'S ONE WAY THAT WE COULD
PRESERVE THIS SPACE INSTEAD
OF THROUGH LAND USE POLICY.
>> YEAH BUDGETING FOR I MEAN I
THINK WE YEAH BUT THAT'S
DEFINITELY A NEW DIRECTION AND
THAT'S ANOTHER TIE IN TO THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RESOLUTIONS BUT THERE MIGHT
NEED TO BE A REGULATORY SUPPORT
FOR THE BUYING BUT I MEAN
WITHOUT SAYING WE'RE GOING TO
SO WE CAN'T WE'LL GET INTO
TROUBLE IF WE DON'T ZONE OUT
AND REDUCE VALUES THAT FALL
FLAT.
>> NO, NO I MEAN BAD DECISIONS
ALREADY BEEN MADE NOT TO
RESTRICT SO RIGHT.
BUT THAT'S THE DIRECTION THAT'S
ALREADY BEEN PROVIDED.
SO YEAH I WOULD AGREE.
>> I DON'T THINK THAT'S THAT'S
WE SHOULD BE MAKING LANGUAGE
RIGHT BASED ON WHAT THE RIGHT
PEOPLE IN USE.
>> YEP.
ONE THOUSAND PERCENT YEAH THAT
WAS LIKE MARKET MANIPULATION.
YEAH YEAH.
>> AND I DON'T REALLY HEAR ANY
CHANGES FOR SEVEN POINT TWO OR
SEVEN POINT THREE IS THAT RIGHT
.
>> ACCURATE ME OTHER THAN I
MAYBE THE TARGET POPULATION
CONSISTENCY OK FOR FOUR SEVEN
POINT TWO OK I DID ADD A MASTER
LEASE MODEL THEY SEEM TO THE
GLOSSARY I MEAN IT'S IN HERE OR
LIKE I THINK I HAD JUST CALLED
IT OR BULLETED WE HAVE IT
HIGHLIGHTED IT'S IN THE BLUE
COLLAR BUT I'M NOT SURE IT
ACTUALLY NEEDS TO BE IN A BLUE
COLLAR.
>> I THINK IT CAN BE IN A
GLOSSARY OR THE SAN FRANCISCO
EXAMPLE KNOW THE MASTER LEASE
MASTER LEASING ON PAGE SEVENTY
FOUR.
>> YES.
AKOLO YOU WOULD LIKE THOSE
WORDS TO BE ADDED TO THE
GLOSSARIES THAT THE NOTE.
>> YEAH AND I'M NOT I DON'T
KNOW THAT THEY NEED TO BE IN
THE CALL-OUT I THINK YEAH I
WOULD ACTUALLY SUGGEST THAT WE
REMOVE THAT.
I DON'T REALLY SEE THE
RELEVANCE OF I MEAN YEAH I KNOW
WHAT IS RELEASING IS IS THAT
YOU KNOW BUT I DON'T KNOW WHAT
YEAH I JUST DON'T KNOW WHAT
RELEVANCE IT HAS TO THIS
PARTICULAR ONE UNLESS AGAIN THE
THING IS I THINK THESE HAVE
LIKE THESE KINDS OF YOU KNOW
ARE YOU SUGGESTING THAT WE DO
THIS OR NOT?
RIGHT.
SO IT WAS IT WAS LIKE SOME
LEVEL OF DIRECTION UNLESS
YOU'RE SAYING OH YEAH, THE CITY
SHOULD MASS RELEASE OTHERWISE
IT SHOULD JUST BE REDACTED
SURELY.
>> YES, IT DOES OFFER THE
POSSIBILITY THAT WE END.
>> YES.
I MEAN THE GREEN SECTION IS
QUITE LARGE AND ALSO I'M
NOTICING THAT WE HAVE A WHOLE
MEETING SET ASIDE FOR CHAPTER
SIX WHICH IS TWO PAGES.
THAT'S THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX.
THAT'S IN THE SPREADSHEET THAT
YOU ALL HAVE THAT HAS NOT BEEN
INCLUDED IN THE PLAN.
YOU WHAT WE WILL HAVE IT BEFORE
YOU EAT IT NOW THAT IT'S BIG
IT'S LIKE OH WE DON'T NEED A
WHOLE NIGHT TO DO TWO PAGES.
YEAH WELL TWO EXTRA MEETING.
>> YEAH.
I THINK IF YOU IF YOU WANT TO
MOVE THIS SECTION NEXT TIME I
COULD GIVE YOU A FEW HIGH LEVEL
NOTES ABOUT IT BASED ON YOUR
COMMENTS AND THEN YOU ALL CAN
DECIDE WHAT YOU WOULD LIKE TO
DO.
>> THAT SOUNDS LIKE A PLAN.
ARE WE ALL SET WITH PAGE
SEVENTY FIVE AND SEVENTY FOUR
EVERYONE FEELS LIKE YOU HAVE
ENOUGH DIRECTION.
>> YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
UM SO A FEW COMMENTS YOU HAVE
IS PEOPLE BROUGHT UP LARGE
SCALE SOLAR IN REGARDS TO THE
NICU UM DRESSING UP STAFF IS
ALSO REVIEWING THIS.
RIGHT.
SO UM DR. ASSISTANCE IS LOOKING
AT THIS AND I THINK THAT THESE
CAN BE MODIFIED.
I THINK SHE HAD MENTIONED THAT
WE DON'T NEED LARGE SCALE
SOLAR, THAT IT'S MAINLY
NEIGHBORHOOD BASED ROOFTOP.
>> SO THOSE WERE TWO COMMENTS
THAT WE DON'T NEED TO TALK
ABOUT.
UM AND I JUST WANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU ARE A LOT
OF YOU'RE BRINGING UP
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE ARE IN CONSTANT
COMMUNICATION WITH TEAMS AT THE
CITY THAT ARE CURRENTLY WORKING
ON PLANS LIKE THIS FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SO THEY KNOW
OUR PROJECTION.
WE ARE LEARNING ABOUT THEIRS.
WE WILL HOPEFULLY SOON BE ABLE
TO HAVE MORE DETAILS THAT WE
CAN SHARE THAT WILL BE
INCORPORATED IN THE PLAN.
SO ALL OF YOUR QUESTIONS AROUND
INFRASTRUCTURE ARE GOOD ONES
BUT WE DON'T HAVE THE EXACT
ANSWERS FOR YOU YET SO I DON'T
KNOW THERE WAS A COMMENT ABOUT
SOME MAPPING AND THE LIKE AND
JUST SO YOU KNOW, THE CITY DOES
MAKE SOME DECISIONS NOT TO
PUBLISH ALL OF OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE FROM A PUBLIC
SAFETY PERSPECTIVE.
SO THAT ALWAYS WILL BE WE WON'T
BE ABLE TO PROVIDE NECESSARILY
THE LEVEL OF DETAIL THAT
SOMEBODY REALLY WANTS TO BE
MORE WONKY ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE
MIGHT WANT.
>> FASCINATING.
THANK YOU FOR THAT
CLARIFICATION AND SO WE WILL
POSTPONE THIS PARTICULAR
PORTION JUST BASED ON THE
SPIRIT OF TIME.
>> IS EVERYBODY OK WITH THAT?
>> ANYONE JUST REALLY HOPING TO
CLARIFY DOES THAT MEAN THAT WE
CAN EXPECT ON APRIL TWENTY
NINTH TO DO THE SECTION AND ALL
OF CHAPTER FIVE?
I THINK SO.
SO CHAPTER FIVE IS SHORTER BUT
IT IS THE NATURE MEANING IT'S
MEANING THAT YEAH.
SO THE I'M SURE GOING TO
GENERATE A LOT OF CONVERSATION
OK ALL RIGHT WITH THAT AND
WE'RE ACTUALLY TO CONCLUDE THE
CHAPTER FOR DISCUSSION TO BE
CONTINUED ON APRIL TWENTY NINTH
WE MOVE ON TO AGENDA NUMBER
EIGHT WHICH IS PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE
FIRST YEAR FROM THOSE PRESENT
AND THEN REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO
SPEAK REMOTELY PLEASE CASTANEDA
ON THE PHONE OR USE RAISED HAND
FEATURE AND ZOOM PHONE ACCESS
PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AND ENTER LEADING INTO
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX.
SO I FEEL LIKE IF I CALL THE
LAST THREE JUST THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME IF AVAILABLE
WE'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK AND PLEASE ENSURE
THAT YOU'RE IN A QUIET AREA
MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE FOR
ALL PARTICIPANTS
SAID YOUR NAME
AND ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT THAT
LIKE SPEAK AT THIS TIME SEEING
THERE'S NOBODY BEHIND THE
PILLARS?
>> RIGHT.
OK, OH YEAH.
YEAH.
AND THEN WITH THAT IS THERE
ANYONE WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
REMOTELY AT THIS TIME?
>> THERE IS OK OH THE PHONE
NUMBER ENDING WITH THREE TO SIX
YOU CAN START JUST FOR THREE
MINUTES.
IT THIS IS JEFF CROCKET CALLING
BACK AND I LISTENED WITH GREAT
INTEREST ABOUT YOUR DISCUSSION
STATISTICS AND I DO HAVE A FEW
COMMENTS ABOUT THIS FIRST AND
VERY DISAPPOINTED BECAUSE THIS
WAS DISCUSSED THE PLANNING
COMMISSION THAT RESPECTIVE
DISTRICTS WERE NOT INCLUDED IN
THE SURVEY TO FIND OUT EXACTLY
POPULAR SUPPORT FOR THEM.
BUT I THINK YOU HAD YOU DONE
THAT YOU WOULD FIND OUT THAT
STATISTICS ARE VERY POPULAR IN
ANN ARBOR FOR A VARIETY
OF REASONS.
>> BUT THE OTHER THING I WANT
TO POINT OUT IS I DISAGREE WITH
THE NOTION THAT IF DISTRICTS IN
ANN ARBOR ARE EXCLUSIONARY, I
HEARD REPORTS ABOUT HISTORIC
DISTRICTS AND OTHER AREAS BUT I
DON'T THINK IT APPLIES TO IN
OUR RESEARCH DISTRICTS DIDN'T
OCCUR TILL THE EARLY 1980S, THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF HISTORIC
DISTRICT WAS CREATED IN
NINETEEN EIGHTY THREE FOR
EXAMPLE.
>> AND I AM NOT AWARE AND
PERHAPS SOMEONE COULD PROVIDE
SOME DATA INVOLVED IN EXACTLY
HOW MUCH HOW MANY PEOPLE WERE
EXCLUDED.
>> I'M NOT AWARE OF ANY IT'S
POSSIBLE THAT YOU KNOW, THE
REAL ESTATE MARKET MAY HAVE
PRECLUDED SOME OF THAT BUT IT
CERTAINLY WASN'T THE HISTORIC
DISTRICT ITSELF.
THE OTHER THING YOU SHOULD
REALIZE IS YOU'LL WORK FOR
DISTRICT DISTRICT IS THE
DENSEST IN THE CITY AND IT HAS
STEADILY INCREASED IN DENSITY
FOR A COUPLE OF REASONS.
>> FIRST, THE THERE IS NO
RESTRICTION ABOUT CHANGING THE
INTERIOR OF THE HOUSE IN
REGARDS TO SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC
STRUCTURES.
>> SO THERE HAS BEEN ONE
LANDLORD WHO OWNS TWO HUNDRED
FIFTY PROPERTIES IN ANN ARBOR
WHO HAS PROBABLY IMPACT.
>> I KNOW OF ABOUT 15 IN OUR
AREA WHERE HE HAS GONE IN
PRETTY MUCH GUTTED THE INTERIOR
AND TRIPLED THE SIZE OF THE
NUMBERS OF RESIDENTS AND ALSO
SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED THE
COST OF THIS.
SECONDLY, THERE HAVE BEEN THREE
EXAMPLES WHERE WE'VE HAD
ADDITIONAL CONDOS AND NEW
DEVELOPMENTS.
ONE THAT YOU SHOULD PAY
PARTICULAR ATTENTION TO IS
WHAT'S HAPPENING WITH SHELBY.
IT'S FIVE THIRTY NORTH DIVISION
AND YOU CREATE THE TOOK TWO
OLDER HOMES WHICH ARE NOT
SIGNIFICANTLY NOT SIGNIFICANT
BUT PUT THEM TOGETHER AND
CREATED A WHOLE BUNCH OF NEW
HOUSING.
>> PLEASE TAKE A LOOK.
THE OTHER THING I WANT TO POINT
OUT IS THAT SHIRLEY BECKLEY WHO
REALLY RECENTLY PASSED AWAY
THERE AN ARTICLE ABOUT HER RYAN
STANTON ABOUT AN AVERAGE BLACK
NEIGHBORHOOD WAS ONCE TARGETED
FOR DEMOLITION AND NOW IT'S
HOME TO ONE MILLION DOLLAR
CONDOS IN THIS CASE THE
EXCLUSION WAS THE DENSITY THAT
WAS CREATED BY TAKING BY
ELIMINATING BLACK HOMES AND I
WOULD SUGGEST THAT THERE ARE
BLACK HOMES AND A NUMBER
OF NEIGHBORHOOD DOWNTOWN THAT
COULD BENEFIT FROM AN HISTORIC
DISTRICT AND I ENCOURAGE YOU TO
CONSIDER THAT WOULD YOU LIKE
ALL OF BLACK HOUSES TO BE
DEMOLISHED TO PUT UP NEW
MULTIPLEX'S I HOPE MR THANK YOU
FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION.
>> THANK MR CROCKET.
TO HAVE OTHER CALLERS I'D LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME SAM
HOHMAN THREE MINUTES TO ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
LOOK THIS IS SAM HOME.
I LIVE ON FOURTEEN ONE COLORED
ROAD UNTIL WE TALK ABOUT THE
NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL OR
COMMERCIAL SPACES.
WHAT I WOULD SUGGEST THERE IS
THAT YOU CAN LOOK TO CREATE
VILLAGE SQUARES WITHIN SUPER
BLOCKS FORMED BY THE ARTERIAL
ROADS.
MOST OF YOUR PLAN IS FOCUSED ON
DEVELOPING THE ARTERIAL ROAD
WHICH IS NOTHING WRONG WITH BUT
THERE DESIRABLE PLACES NO ONE
EVER WANTS TO GO SIT OUTSIDE AT
THE STARBUCKS ON.
SO ONE AREA IN PARTICULAR I
WOULD LOOK AT EACH PAGE AVENUE
BETWEEN KING GEORGE AND PINE
VALLEY THAT'S THEIR AREA RIGHT
BEHIND THE GEORGE BUSH IS A BIG
PARKING LOT THERE.
THAT WOULD BE A PERFECT PLACE
TO CENTER SOME RETAIL SQUARE
THAT'S NOT AN ARTERIAL I KNOW A
PLACE WOULD BE THE CENTER BLOCK
AND WOODBURY GARDENS THAT WOULD
BE AN EXCELLENT PLACE TO CREATE
A RESIDENTIAL OR A VILLAGE
SQUARE WITHIN THE SUPER BLOCKS
.
THE OTHER THING I'D POINT OUT
IS THAT ZONING RESEARCH PARK IS
NOT AN APPROPRIATE PLACE TO PUT
RESIDENTIAL THERE ARE NO PARKS
THERE, NO SCHOOL LIBRARIES,
THERE ARE NO STORES THERE AND
MOST IMPORTANTLY THERE ARE NO
PEDESTRIAN PATHS ACROSS FOR
THERE IT IS VERY DANGEROUS.
I DO SEE PEOPLE WALKING.
THERE ARE A LOT RIGHT THERE A
LOT AND IT'S JUST NOT A SAFE
PLACE TO PUT RESIDENTIAL.
SO I WOULD REALLY, REALLY
ENCOURAGE YOU NOT TO ZONE THAT
TO ALLOW RESIDENTIAL ZONING
THERE.
IT'S JUST NOT A SAFE PLACE.
>> IT'S NOT INAPPROPRIATE USE
OF ZONING.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, MR. HOHMANN.
DO WE HAVE OTHER CALLERS CALLER
WITH THE PHONE NUMBER ANY ONE
FIVE THREE FOUR YOU HAVE THREE
MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION IT EVENING AGAIN TOM
STALBERG AND TWO ZERO TWO
TREVER.
>> I'D LIKE TO THANK BOTH THE
OTHER CALLERS ONE FOR STICKING
WITH THE WHOLE MEETING AND TWO
FOR MAKING EXCELLENT COMMENTS
BOTH OF THEM IN TERMS
OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
I DO BELIEVE YOU'RE PAINTING
THEM WITH A BROAD BRUSH.
>> THEY ARE NOT ALL ALIKE.
THEY OPERATE DIFFERENTLY.
THEY WERE CREATED AT DIFFERENT
TIMES FOR DIFFERENT REASONS.
I HAPPEN TO LIVE CURRENTLY IN
THE BROADWAY HISTORIC DISTRICT.
I'LL LET YOU DO YOUR OWN
HOMEWORK AND LOOK WHEN IT WAS
CREATED MUCH MORE RECENTLY THAN
YOU MIGHT THINK BASED ON THE
COMMENTS THAT WERE MADE.
I MOVED BACK TO TOWN IN 1984
INTO A TRIPLEX IN THE OLD WEST
SIDE HISTORIC DISTRICT THAT WAS
AN AFFORDABLE HOUSING OPTION
BECAUSE OF THREE OF US WHO
BOUGHT IT AND AS WE MOVED ON
AND RENTED IT OUT TO OTHERS,
WE'VE MADE A BUSINESS OUT
OF MOSTLY DUPLEXES BUT TRIPLEX
INCLUDED AS AFFORDABLE
WORKFORCE HOUSING OVER THE PAST
THREE YEARS I'M SORRY THIRTY
YEARS A LOT IN HISTORIC
DISTRICTS AND HISTORIC
DISTRICTS UP ON THE NORTH SIDE
WHERE WE HAVE THE GREATEST
CONCENTRATION OF THE ALL THE
HOMES IN THE CITY IN ANN ARBOR
I LIVE 1839 STRUCTURE WITH SOME
ADDITIONS ON IT AS WELL THAT
OTHERS DID BEFORE ME.
>> YOUR CONCEPT OF TAKING A
HOUSE TEARING IT DOWN BUILDING
COMPLEX LET'S SAY AND SAYING
THAT THOSE WILL BE MORE
AFFORDABLE PER LAND MASS OR
HOWEVER YOUR CALCULATIONS
CALCULATIONS DO THE MATH FOR US
PLEASE.
I WANT TO SEE YOUR NUMBERS,
RALPH.
>> THE KEY IS GONE THROUGH THE
TROUBLE OF DOING THE NUMBERS
AND PRESENTED IT MORE THAN ONCE
WHERE YOU TEAR DOWN A MODEST
HOUSE AND PUT UP MULTIPLE UNITS
THERE.
>> EACH ONE IS GOING TO BE MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN THE ORIGINAL
UNIT WAS BUILT AND IT WILL NOT
BECOME AFFORDABLE OVER TIME AND
THE WAY THAT YOU'VE DESCRIBED
IT SHOW ME YOUR NUMBERS KEEP
MAKING THAT ARGUMENT BECAUSE
RALPH, THE KEY HAS SHOWED US
HIS NUMBERS LAST NIGHT AND
PLEASE CLARIFY BETWEEN PUBLIC
COMMENT PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR THE
CITIZENS, THESE MATTERS FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THERE WAS
CONFUSION LAST TIME PEOPLE
WAITED TO SPEAK.
IT DID NOT SPEAK AT A PUBLIC
HEARING BECAUSE I'M SORRY THE
PUBLIC COMMENT AT THE BEGINNING
BECAUSE THEY THOUGHT IT WAS
GOING TO BE A PUBLIC HEARING
CHAPTERS ONE, TWO AND THREE
THEY WERE LEFT ON THE PHONE
UNABLE TO CALL IN AND BE
RECOGNIZED.
>> I BELIEVE WE HAVE A
SUBSTITUTE CHAIR.
SO THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN PART
OF THE CONFUSION IF THERE'S A
PUBLIC HEARING FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, PLEASE MAKE
SURE THAT IT'S CLEAR THAT IT'S
A PUBLIC HEARING IF THOSE WHO
SIMPLY NEED TO BE SAID IT
PUBLIC PLEASE MAKE THAT CLEAR.
>> A LOT OF CITIZENS WERE
COMPLETELY CONFUSED AND UNAWARE
OF HOW TO HANDLE THAT.
>> SOME CLARITY.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.
THANK YOU.
WE HAVE OTHER CALLERS CALLER
OVER THE PHONE NUMBER ENDING
WITH FIVE FIVE SIX.
>> YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
HELLO, THIS IS RALPH MCKIE FROM
THE TALK.
HEAR ME OK?
YES, WE CAN I I WANT TO SAY A
COUPLE OF THINGS I GUESS I'LL
START WITH TOM GILBERT WAS
TALKING ABOUT BECAUSE THAT WAS
BY KNOW BACK IN THE
STURTEVANT'S ZERO THERE WAS
SOMETHING IN THAT PLAN
ORIGINALLY THAT SAID QUOTE
FLEXORS ON EVERY LAST WORD
ENHANCE AFFORDABILITY.
I DID THE MATH.
I TALKED TO BUILDERS I USED TO
REPRESENT DEVELOPERS SOME I
HAVE SOME IDEA THE MATH THERE I
WORKED UP THE NUMBERS AND THAT
ROUGHLY IT WAS A THREE HUNDRED
FIFTY THOUSAND OUR HOUSE WOULD
RESULT IN FOUR UNITS THAT WOULD
BE SOMEWHERE BETWEEN FIVE OR
FIVE FIFTY AS CONDOS I WOULD
RENT FOR TWENTY TWO HUNDRED AND
THIS IS PART OF I THINK WHAT I
VIEW AS TRUTHTELLING WHICH IS
WHAT I THINK YOU SHOULD BE
DOING RATHER THAN PROPAGANDA
WHICH IS IT SEEMS TO ME THAT IS
GOING ON HERE BUT THIS ENTIRE
PROCESS IS REALLY A PROPAGANDA
PIECE WHERE HERE YOU HAVE THREE
GOALS TO SHOW THAT THE CURRENT
SITUATION IS VERY BAD.
NUMBER TWO, DENSITY WILL MAKE
THINGS BETTER IN A SIGNIFICANT
WAY.
AND NUMBER THREE, DON'T BE
SCARED BECAUSE IT'LL ALL BE OK
AND THEN SIX, WE'LL DEAL ZONING
DETAILS LATER AND YOU'RE TRYING
TO KEEP ANYTHING THAT SCARE YOU
OUT OF THIS DOCUMENT.
LET ME GIVE YOU A COUPLE
OF EXAMPLES THAT WAS ONE
OF THEM THAT I STARTED WITH
THAT YOU KNOW, THOSE THOSE
CONVERSIONS WILL ACTUALLY MEAN
YOU'RE TRADING ONE ONE SORT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSE BEFORE AND
AFFORDABLE UNITS MAYBE THAT'S
GOOD.
MAYBE IT'S NOT.
YOU TALK ABOUT RESEARCH THAT
THAT SHOWS
ENHANCED
AFFORDABILITY WITH INCREASED
SUPPLY.
I'VE HAD THOSE STUDIES TO THE
YOU MIGHT GET THAT RESULT.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE FIFTEEN,
TWENTY YEARS OUT.
YOU NEED TO SAY THAT IN HERE
OTHERWISE YOU'RE MISLEADING ALL
THE YOUNG FAMILIES, ALL THE
STUDENTS THAT THAT WANT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND WANT TO
LIVE HERE.
THEIR KIDS MIGHT MIGHT BE
HELPED BY BY ALL THE
DENSIFICATION THEY WILL THAT
YOU NEED TO SAY THAT THAT'S
JUST THE FACT THE TRUTH AND
ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF WHAT I'LL
CALL PROPAGATE PROPAGANDA.
>> YOU HAVE THE YEAR A CHART
YOUR OR YOUR PARAGRAPH.
OH, IT'S SORT OF PARTICIPATING
IN CONSTRUCTION.
YOU'VE GOT YOU'VE GOT A BAR
GRAPH THAT YOU HAD REALLY TWO
YEARS TWENTY THERE WAS NOTHING
IN THE FIRST TWO YEARS OF COVID
YOU'VE GOT TWO YEARS SEVEN AND
FIFTY TIMES TEN FIVE IS THERE'S
NO CAP AT ALL AND YOU GUYS ARE
SOCIAL SCIENTISTS AND
PROFESSIONALS THAT THAT SHOULD
BE PRETTY OBVIOUS.
LAST POINT, MR. NORTON, IF YOU
CAN FIND ME A LITIGATED CASE
THAT SAYS YOU COULD REALLY HAVE
OUR WHOLE ZONING CODE THROWN
OUT THROWN OUT BECAUSE WE'RE
NOT GOING TO FIND FAST ENOUGH
THAT I HEAR THAT RIGHT.
>> CAN YOU HEAR SOMETHING FROM
US SAYING THAT TO YOU OR YOUR
CITY ATTORNEY?
MISS MCKEE?
THANK YOU.
THAT'S ALL I HEAR.
I APPRECIATE YOUR THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ROSS SMITH, YOU HAVE THREE
I APPRECIATE YOUR THANK YOU.
MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
ROSS SMITH, YOU HAVE THREE
COMMISSION.
MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
HEY, ROD SMITH FROM THE SIXTY
COMMISSION.
SEVEN.
HEY, ROD SMITH FROM THE SIXTY
CHARLETON, I'M SORRY I CALLED
SEVEN.
KEEP THIS PAEPCKE THROUGH HERE
CHARLETON, I'M SORRY I CALLED
VERY LATE.
KEEP THIS PAEPCKE THROUGH HERE
I MUST AS WELL EXPRESS MY
VERY LATE.
GRATITUDE FOR YOU STICKING
I MUST AS WELL EXPRESS MY
WITHOUT DOING ALL THIS HARD
GRATITUDE FOR YOU STICKING
WORK AND PUTTING UP WITH ALL
WITHOUT DOING ALL THIS HARD
THE SPICY COMMENTS I'VE BEEN
WORK AND PUTTING UP WITH ALL
THROWING AWAY.
THE SPICY COMMENTS I'VE BEEN
I PROMISE YOU ARE APPRECIATED
THROWING AWAY.
BY LOTS OF PEOPLE THAT ARE
I PROMISE YOU ARE APPRECIATED
STICKING AROUND TO CALL IN AT
BY LOTS OF PEOPLE THAT ARE
11:00 P.M. OH THANK YOU.
STICKING AROUND TO CALL IN AT
THANK YOU.
11:00 P.M. OH THANK YOU.
NO, THERE IS TRULY
OK THAT WE
ARE GOING TO CLOSE OUR COMMENT.
I THINK THERE IS GENERALLY
COMMISSION PROPOSED BUSINESS
THERE ANY I REMOVED IT FROM THE
AGENDA SO YOU KNOW GOTCHA.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
WITH THAT WE ARE GOING TO THE
FINAL ITEM ON THE AGENDA WHICH
IS A GOVERNMENT MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER WHICH SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR SAY I.
>> WE ARE ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU